# B-17: Queen of the Skies — Final Merged Rules

> Merged from Pass 1 (pdftotext) and Pass 3 (pdfplumber) extractions. Pass 1 used as base; Pass 3 used to fill formatting gaps. OCR artifacts corrected where unambiguous. Original section numbering preserved.

---

## PART I: RULES OF PLAY

### 1.0 INTRODUCTION

B-17: QUEEN OF THE SKIES re-creates World War II bombing missions of the famous 8th Air Force Flying Fortresses during the period of November 1942 to May 1943. This was a trial period for the proponents of strategic daylight bombing. The green crews had to prove the value of this concept as well as the fitness of themselves and their equipment. During these early months, both the bombers and their German air defense counterparts were evenly matched, with each side experimenting, learning, and looking for an advantage.

B-17 is designed as a solitaire game, with the player acting for the crew of an individual bomber. The actions of the German air defenses and the fate of the bomber and crew are randomly generated by various game aids and tables. Each "game" consists of a single bombing mission. The ultimate goal is to safely complete 25 missions thereby earning a ticket home to a relatively safe job. In practice, this is rarely achieved and players should instead try to complete 25 missions with a minimum number of bombers and crewmen lost.

Because of the nature of the solitaire play system, B-17 makes extensive use of game aids and tables as a substitute for a live German air defense player. Before attempting to fly a mission, the player should examine all of the game's components. Their purpose should be apparent. This rules booklet has been divided into three parts. This first part is the standard game rules which explain in detail how to play. The second part is the step by step description of an actual game mission, which serves as a programmed instruction and example of play. Part III consists of additional notes, bibliography, and credits. New players should read Part I through section 7.0, How to Win, and then read through the sample mission. Experienced game players should find that this will be enough information to get started, and can refer to the detailed rules for special cases. Before starting the 25 mission campaign, it is suggested that a few practice missions be flown to random targets to learn the game system.

### 2.0 GAME EQUIPMENT

#### 2.1 B-17 MAPBOARD
The principle area of play for B-17 is the 11" × 16" mounted mapboard. The top half of the mapboard is a depiction of a B-17 in flight, with a landscape visible below. This part of the board is used to resolve combat between German fighters and the B-17. The lower half of the board displays various tables which will be consulted often during combat.

#### 2.2 B-17 STRATEGIC MOVEMENT BOARD
This map of northwestern Europe shows the area of B-17 bombing missions during the time period covered by the game. Marked on the map are all of the potential target cities, and the 8th Air Force Base in England. The strategic area shown is divided into concentric zones expanding out from the base, each approximately 50 miles apart. Under normal conditions, the B-17 travels one zone per turn. When its speed is reduced by damage, the B-17 may need two turns to travel one zone. (Regardless of damage, a B-17 will never spend more than two turns in a zone.)

#### 2.3 CREW PLACEMENT BOARD
This board displays the interior of the B-17, and shows where the various crew members are placed. During play, the wounds and position changes of crew members will be marked here.

#### 2.4 TABLES AND CHARTS CARDS
The five colored cards display most of the charts and tables which are used to generate the various random events of a typical bombing mission. The use of the tables is explained in section 3.0, Game Tables in Play.

#### 2.5 GERMAN FIGHTER CARDS
There are 16 German fighter cards of three different types: the Messerschmitt 109 (Me 109), Messerschmitt 110 (Me 110), and Focke-Wulf 190 (FW 190). These fighter cards will be placed on the B-17 Mapboard when called for to represent fighters attacking the B-17.

#### 2.6 DIE CUT COUNTERSHEET
The 88 die cut counters are used in play to mark the position of the B-17 on the Strategic Movement Board, the position of the B-17 crew on the Crew Placement Board, the targets of the various B-17 machine guns, damage to the B-17, damage to the German fighters, and wounds to the B-17 crew.

#### 2.7 MISSION CHART PAD
The events of each mission are recorded as they unfold on a Mission Chart. The pad in B-17 includes enough charts for 70 missions. An example of how the Mission Chart can be used is included with the sample mission in Part II of this rulebook.

#### 2.8 COMPOSITE MISSION RECORD
At the back of the Mission Chart Pad are two Composite Mission Records. These charts are used to record the results of each of the 25 missions of the Campaign Game. The composite record has space to note personnel changes, bomber losses, and the percentage of bombs on target.

### 3.0 GAME TABLES IN PLAY

Due to the nature of B-17's solitaire play system, extensive use of various tables has been necessary to generate the many possible events that could occur during a typical bombing mission. The tables which will be consulted during play are found on the separate colored cards and on the mounted game mapboard.

#### 3.1 LOCATING THE TABLES
Each table included in the game has been given a letter-number designation, and a descriptive name. For example, the table which details shell hit damage in the B-17's Bomb Bay section is labeled P-3 BOMB BAY. The letter half of the designation indicates whether the table is on the mapboard or on a card, as follows:

- **M** = Mounted mapboard
- **O** = Orange card
- **P** = Pink card
- **B** = Buff card
- **BL** = Blue card
- **G** = Green card

If the table is on the mapboard or on a card, the number designation is the number of that table on the card or board. For example, Bomb Bay Table P-3 is the third table on the Pink card. A complete list of the tables in B-17 is included on the back page of the rulebook.

#### 3.2 USING THE TABLES
The game tables are used by rolling one or two six-sided dice and reading the result generated off of the table. Throughout the game the notation "1D" means roll one die when consulting this table, and the notation "2D" means roll two dice. Tables G-3 and B-3 are special cases. When rolling "2D" on these tables, treat the first die as the 10's digit and the second die as the 1's digit of a 2 digit number. Rolling two dice on these tables will thus generate 36 different random numbers ranging from a low of "11" to a high of "66".

### 4.0 PLACING THE GAME EQUIPMENT

Before beginning, the player should organize the various game components in front of himself in a manner that will facilitate reference. The Mission Chart, the mounted mapboard, and the Crew Placement Board should be readily accessible. The player will be constantly making notes on the first, and the game counters will be in play on the latter two. The remaining game counters and fighter cards should also be close enough to be distinguished when needed. The other components do not have to be placed where they are readable, but must be within reach.

#### 4.1 FIGHTER CARDS
The three different types of German fighter cards should be stacked to the side of the mapboard until called for. When a wave of fighters is generated from Table B-3, bring a fighter of the correct type into play as follows:

- If a German fighter is attacking from a **high** position, place its card on the landscape portion of the mapboard in its designated clock position.
- If the fighter is attacking from a **level** position, place its card on the blue border of the mapboard in its designated clock position.
- If the fighter is attacking from a **low** position, place its card just off the edge of the mapboard in its designated clock position.
- If the fighter is attacking from a **vertical dive**, place its card directly on top of the B-17 on the mapboard.
- If the fighter is attacking from a **vertical climb**, place its card on the blue border of the mapboard in the lower left corner marked "Vertical Climb".

#### 4.2 GAME COUNTERS
At the beginning of the mission, place all crew and fire extinguisher counters in their appropriate places on the Crew Placement Board. The B-17 counter is placed in the 8th Air Force Base space on the Strategic Movement Board.

The remaining counters are placed aside within reach until needed. The FCA and FBOA counters mark damage to enemy fighters. When called for, they are placed directly on top of the damaged fighter's card. Counters detailing damage to the B-17 are placed directly on the B-17 Mapboard on the location of the damage. For example, if a fuel tank on the Port Wing is leaking, a fuel tank leak counter is placed on the Port Wing. The machine gun counters are placed on the fighter which the gun is firing at when defensive fire is allocated. Wound counters are placed on the Crew Placement Board to mark wounded crewmen.

### 5.0 SEQUENCE OF PLAY

#### 5.1 PRE-MISSION STEPS
a. Be sure the B-17 has a name and full crew recorded on the Composite Mission Record and the Mission Chart. Place all crew counters in the appropriate positions on the Crew Placement Board, and have the Strategic Movement Board, game mapboard, playing counters, and all rules and tables at hand.

b. Roll for the mission target city on either Table G-1, G-2, or G-3 (depending on the number of the mission) and record it on the Composite Mission Record and the Mission Chart.

c. Roll for the B-17's position in its squadron (Lead bomber, tail bomber, or in the middle) on Table G-4 and check the corresponding box on the MC. Note that bombers in the lead or tail positions are attacked by an additional fighter per German fighter wave as indicated on the MC.

d. Roll for the B-17's squadron formation (High, middle, or low squadron) on Table G-4 and check the corresponding box on the Mission Chart. Note any modifications to the rolls for enemy fighters on Tables B-1 and B-2 due to the B-17's squadron formation. (The low squadron was most prone to German attack, while the middle squadron was least prone to attack.)

e. Examine the Flight Log Gazetteer, Chart G-11, to find the modifications in each zone to the rolls for enemy fighters on Tables B-1 and B-2. Add these modifications with any for the B-17's squadron position and note them on the Mission Chart.

f. Place the B-17 counter on the Strategic Mission Board inside the map square labelled "8th Air Force Base", facing in the direction of the target city. The mission is ready to begin.

#### 5.2 MISSION STEPS
a. Each turn, move the B-17 counter one zone closer to the zone containing the target (or one zone closer to the base when returning after bombing the target).

b. Roll for fighter cover on Table G-5 (either Poor, Fair, or Good) and record the extent of the fighter cover (either P, F, or G) on the Mission Chart when entering Zones 2, 3, and 4.

c. Resolve combat initiated by enemy fighters in each zone entered (both to and from the target) according to the Combat Procedure, section 6.0.

d. When the B-17 enters the Designated Target Zone:
- Roll for weather over the target on Table O-1, and then resolve combat according to the Combat Procedure, taking into account any weather effects.
- Resolve anti-aircraft fire by consulting Tables O-2 through O-5.
- Resolve the Bomb Run by consulting Tables O-6 and O-7.

e. After the Bomb Run is resolved:
- Begin the return flight to England by turning the B-17 counter around and facing it towards the 8th Air Force Base.
- Resolve combat again in this zone, still taking into account any weather effects (roll again on Table B-2).

f. Each subsequent turn of the return flight to base, place the B-17 counter one zone closer to the 8th Air Force Base, and resolve combat according to the Combat Procedure.

g. When the B-17 re-enters Zone 1:
- Roll for weather at the base on Table O-1.
- Place the B-17 counter on the 8th Air Force Base, and roll for landing on Table G-9 taking into account all weather effects and damage modifiers.
- After landing, roll separately for each seriously wounded crew member according to Note b of Table Bl-4 to determine survival. Also roll for frostbite effects under the rules section Heat Out/Frostbite, if applicable.

h. Record mission results on Composite Mission Record.

### 6.0 COMBAT PROCEDURE

#### 6.1 DETERMINE ATTACKERS
a. Roll for the number of waves of intercepting German fighters on Table B-1 (roll on Table B-2 if the B-17 counter is in the target's zone).

b. For each separate wave of attackers roll once on Table B-3 to determine the specific fighters encountered and the clock position of their attack. Record the 2D number of each wave (from Table B-3) on the Mission Record for reference. (When this wave's attack has been resolved, cross out the number.) Place the fighters on the game mapboard in the proper clock position of their attack.

#### 6.2 FIGHTER COVER DEFENSE
If the B-17 counter is within Zones 2, 3, or 4, roll on Table M-4 to determine how many of this wave's fighters are driven off by friendly fighter cover. Immediately remove that many fighters of your choice from the map. If the B-17 is outside of friendly fighter cover (in Zones 5-8) ignore this step.

#### 6.3 B-17 DEFENSIVE FIRE
a. Each available manned MG (machine gun) position may fire at any one fighter within its field of fire as shown on Table M-1. Designate the targets of each MG position with the appropriate counter. Mark off one burst of ammunition for each MG position firing.

b. Roll once on Table M-1 for each firing MG position to determine if the target fighter is hit.

c. For each hit a fighter receives, roll once on Table M-2 to determine the damage to the fighter from that hit. Remove destroyed fighters, and place FCA and/or FBOA counters on damaged fighters.

#### 6.4 GERMAN OFFENSIVE FIRE
a. Roll once on Table M-3 for each surviving fighter to determine if that fighter hits the B-17, taking into account any modifiers due to damage. Any fighter which does not hit the B-17 is removed from play (exception: see section 13.1).

b. When a fighter hits the B-17, roll once on Table B-4 to determine the number of shells which hit the bomber from that fighter.

c. For each shell hit, roll once on Table B-5 under the appropriate clock position of the attacking fighter to determine the section of the B-17 this shell hit. Record all sections hit on the Mission Chart.

d. Roll once on the specific damage tables (P-1 through P-6, Bl-1, and Bl-2) for each hit to determine and resolve damage done. Record all damage and effects of damage on the Mission Chart.

#### 6.5 SUCCESSIVE ATTACKS
a. Any fighter which scores a hit in its initial attack on the B-17 (even if the hit has no effect) attacks the B-17 again. Roll once on Table B-6 for each fighter making a successive attack to determine its new attack position. After all fighters conducting successive attacks are positioned, remove the number of fighters allowed due to successful fighter cover according to the roll on Table M-4 during the initial attack. Then resolve defensive fire and the fighter attacks normally. Fighters not scoring a hit during this attack are removed from play (exception: see section 13.1).

b. Fighters which score a hit during their first successive attack conduct a second successive attack as above. After its second successive attack, a fighter is removed from play, even if it scored hits every time. The most attacks any one fighter can make against the B-17 during one wave is three—one initial and two successive attacks.

#### 6.6 2ND AND 3RD WAVES
Resolve any additional wave attacks according to the Combat Procedure described for the 1st Wave above. (Roll again for fighter cover defense on Table M-4 for each additional wave while in Zones 2, 3, and 4.) After all attacks have been resolved completely, continue the mission according to the Mission Steps above.

### 7.0 HOW TO WIN

A B-17's bombing results and survival determine whether a mission is an 8th Air Force Victory, a German Air Defense Victory, or a draw. The cumulative results over 25 missions determine victory in the Campaign Game. In addition, the survival of an individual bomber or crew member over several missions can be measured as a relative performance rating.

#### 7.1 MISSION VICTORY CONDITIONS
A mission is considered an **8th Air Force Victory** if the B-17's Bomb Run was On Target, and the B-17 returned to England not irreparably damaged.

A mission is considered a **German Air Defense Victory** if either the B-17 was destroyed in combat, crashed outside of England, or was irreparably damaged in combat or while landing.

A Mission is considered a **Draw** if the B-17 was unable to bomb the target or if the bomb drop was Off Target, but returned to England and was not irreparably damaged either in combat or while landing.

#### 7.2 CAMPAIGN GAME VICTORY CONDITIONS
At the end of the 25 mission campaign, total the number of 8th Air Force Victories and German Air Defense Victories, and ignore the number of draws. The side with the most victories is the winner of the Campaign Game.

#### 7.3 PERFORMANCE RATINGS

**B-17 AND CREW MEMBER SURVIVAL RATING** (Per plane or per crew member)

| # of Missions Survived | Rating |
|---|---|
| 1-5 | Poor |
| 6-10 | Fair |
| 11-17 | Good |
| 18-24 | Excellent |
| 25 | Superb |

Notes:
- a) A B-17 which survives 25 missions may be retired and sent back to the USA for publicity and morale boosting, or it may continue to fly.
- b) A B-17 may survive 25 or more missions while going through several sets of crews along the way.
- c) Any crew member who survives 25 missions is sent home to the USA.
- d) A B-17 may be destroyed, but surviving crew members continue on another plane.

**BOMB RUN RESULT RATING** (Per plane or group of planes for multi-plane missions)

| Bomb Run Percentage | Rating |
|---|---|
| < 5% | Poor |
| 5-14% | Fair |
| 15-29% | Good |
| 30%+ | Excellent |

Note: The Bomb Run performance ratings can be used to rate the bomb drop of a single mission, the average of several planes on the same mission, or the average of a single plane over a complete campaign.

### 8.0 ABORTING THE MISSION

"Aborting a mission" means that the B-17 turns around and heads for home without bombing the target. Historically, the decision to abort or continue was the captain's, and his word was final. For purposes of this game, players may choose to abort after resolving all combat in any zone. However, the aborted mission counts toward the required 25 missions only if any of the following circumstances arise due to German fighter attacks:

a. Bomb Bay doors, intercom, or Norden bombsight inoperable.
b. Compartment heat or suit heater inoperable for one or more crewmen.
c. Bombardier is seriously wounded or KIA.
d. If the Navigator is seriously wounded or KIA and the B-17 is out of formation, the B-17 must abort.
e. If both the Pilot and Co-pilot are seriously wounded or KIA and the B-17 is out of formation, the B-17 must abort.
f. Out of formation.
g. Oxygen out for one or more crewmen.
h. One or more engines out. (If two or more engines are out, B-17 must abort.)

Except where required above to abort, players having the option to abort may choose instead to continue the mission.

### 9.0 DEFENSIVE FIRE

Begin the Defensive Fire Phase by checking which machine gun positions are manned and finding the counters for those guns. Then examine Table M-1 and the position of the enemy fighters to determine which guns have target fighters in their field of fire. Allocate the fire of the B-17's guns by marking the target fighter with the appropriate counter. For example, if both the Nose Gun and the Top Turret are firing at a fighter at 12 O'Clock High, the counters for the Nose Gun and Top Turret are placed on that fighter's card. After the gun counters are all placed, mark off one burst of ammunition (one box) for each firing gun on the Mission Chart. Then roll on Table M-1 for each gun to determine if the target fighter is hit. When a fighter is hit by defensive fire, roll on Table M-2 to determine the extent of the damage done. The guns in the Nose section and the Tail Guns have special characteristics. Players may optionally employ Area Spray Fire.

#### 9.1 NOSE SECTION GUNS
Due to the limited compartment space, only two crewmen may be in the Nose section of the B-17. There are three guns in this section, the Nose, the Starboard Cheek, and the Port Cheek. A maximum of two of these three guns may be fired at the same time, including the Nose and either of the cheek guns. The two cheek guns may not be fired simultaneously.

#### 9.2 TAIL GUNS
German fighters quickly learned that it was very dangerous to approach a B-17 from the rear, as this put them within range of the twin guns for a relatively long period of time. When attacks from the rear dropped off, tail gunners developed a new technique: shooting at fighters attacking from the front as they passed the rear of the B-17.

Accordingly, the Tail Guns may be allocated to any fighter attacking from the 10:30, 12, or 1:30 positions, whether High, Level, or Low. However, this defensive fire is not resolved until after all other defensive fire and all German offensive fire is resolved. Thus the target fighter could be shot down, or the Tail Guns themselves be knocked out, before the Tail Guns get a chance to fire. No ammunition is marked off unless the Tail Guns actually shoot. Tail Guns firing in this manner must roll a "6" to hit, regardless of the position of the fighter. Tail Guns may not fire in this manner if the intercom is out.

#### 9.3 ACE GUNNERS
Once a gunner has shot down 5 or more fighters in his career, he is an Ace Gunner and may add 1 to his defensive fire rolls. Ace Gunners lose this bonus when frostbitten and when wounded. The bonus is retained if the intercom is knocked out. A gunner becomes an Ace at the instant of his 5th kill, and the bonus takes effect with his next defensive fire.

#### 9.4 MACHINE GUN AMMUNITION
The ammunition available for each machine gun position per mission is shown on the Mission Chart. Each box next to the gun position's name represents one burst of ammunition. Mark off one box when a gun position is allocated to fire. When a gun position runs out of ammunition (all boxes are marked off), it may borrow additional ammunition from another position. Ammunition is transferred in increments of 2 bursts (2, 4, 6, etc., bursts at a time). Mark off the boxes from the gun passing the ammunition, and erase marked off boxes for the gun receiving the ammunition. Twin gun mounts (Ball, Top, and Tail positions) may only obtain ammunition from another twin mount. Ammunition may only be exchanged during a turn when no fighter waves are rolled on Tables B-1 or B-2, or after all attacking fighters have been driven off either by friendly fighter cover or other B-17s.

#### 9.5 AREA SPRAY FIRE (Optional Rule)
Area Spray Fire represents the "hosing" of an area with a long burst of an unaimed spray of bullets. Although usually ineffective as far as hits were concerned, it could drive away a fighter due to the bewildering effect of numerous tracer bullets peppering the sky the fighter was flying into. The technique of spray fire was not favored by experienced gunners because 1) it quickly burned up ammunition, 2) was generally ineffective against good pilots, and 3) could jam the gun.

Area Spray Fire is an optional rule which players may include for additional interest. Place a Spray Fire marker on top of any gun marker that will spray during the Defensive Fire Phase. Mark off three bursts of ammunition for each gun position that sprays. When the spraying gun fires, resolve its fire on Table M-5 instead of Table M-1. Area Spray Fire may not be used against any 10:30, 12, 1:30, or Vertical Dive attacks. It may be used against any 3, 6, 9, or Vertical Climb attacks. Ace Gunners employing Area Spray Fire do not add 1 to their die roll.

### 10.0 ENGINES OUT

One of the strengths of the B-17 design was its four engines. Crews found that the plane could continue to fly, even with only one engine still functioning. However, the loss of each succeeding engine meant new problems and more danger.

#### 10.1 ONE ENGINE OUT
With one engine out, the B-17 can only stay in formation if it jettisons its bombs immediately. If the B-17 is already in the Target Zone when the engine is knocked out, it may bomb the target and still remain in formation. Otherwise, if the B-17 decides to keep its bombs aboard and continues to the target with one engine out, it is Out of Formation and must spend 2 turns in each zone (while it still has its bombs) due to slowness caused by the weight of the bombs. The B-17 must therefore roll for waves of German fighters twice per zone on either Table B-1 or B-2. Once the B-17 has dropped its bombs, it may continue its mission at the normal rate of speed of 1 zone per turn.

#### 10.2 TWO OR THREE ENGINES OUT
The B-17 must jettison its bombs, drop from formation, and spend 2 turns in each zone due to slowing down. Roll for waves of German fighters twice per zone on either Table B-1 or B-2. The B-17 must also drop to 10,000 feet and is subject to Light Flak if over land (see section 13.0 Out of Formation). When a B-17 has two or more engines out, attacking fighters add 1 to their German Offensive Fire die rolls on Table M-3, and the B-17 may not take Evasive Action (see section 15.0).

#### 10.3 ONE ENGINE OPERATING
The B-17 may go one zone further, then it must either crash land, or the crew must bail out on Table G-6. However, the crew may throw overboard all bombs, guns, ammo, and fire extinguishers, and fly 2 zones past the zone in which the third engine was lost. When landing with only one engine, subtract 3 from the landing roll on Tables G-9 and G-10. (See 10.2 above for additional effects.)

#### 10.4 NO ENGINES OPERATING
The B-17 must either crash land in its present zone on either Table G-9 or G-10 (find this zone in the Flight Log Gazetteer to determine if the B-17 is over land or water, or if you have a choice), or the crew must bail out on Table G-6 (and Table G-8 if over water). Once the last engine is out, the player must immediately choose either to attempt the crash landing or bail out. If crash landing with all engines out, landing roll is -7 on Table G-9 and -4 on Table G-10. (See 10.2 above for additional effects.)

### 11.0 HEAT OUT/FROSTBITE

The B-17 normally operated above 20,000 feet where the temperatures were substantially below freezing. Some crewmen operated in heated compartments, and others wore electrically heated suits which they plugged into the B-17's circuitry. When battle damage or equipment malfunction cut off someone's heat, the plane had to drop out of formation and descend to an altitude with a more moderate temperature before frostbite could occur.

When any crewmen's suit heat or any compartment heat is out, the B-17 may travel one more zone at the current altitude and in formation. Thereafter, the B-17 must either descend to 10,000 feet for warmth (no frostbite, but the B-17 is out of formation), or stay in formation at current altitude and roll for frostbite once per zone for each affected crewman. Roll 1D; 1-3 = Frostbite for that crewman; 4-6 = No frostbite. Once a crew member is frostbitten, he remains so for the rest of the mission, and he can hit attacking fighters only by rolling a 6, regardless of the position of their attack.

After landing, roll for each frostbitten crew member separately to determine the effects of frostbite. Roll 1D: 1,2 — Serious injury/amputation, may not fly again; 3-6 — Recovers, may fly next mission. Also, any frostbitten crew member who is also seriously wounded adds 1 to his serious wound survival die roll (see Note b. under Table Bl-4).

> **Errata #5:** Recovery from frostbite is correct as shown in Note (b) to Table Bl-5 (1-3 = may not fly again; 4-6 = recovers), not as shown in this rules section.

### 12.0 OXYGEN OUT

Because the atmosphere at 20,000+ feet is so thin, B-17 crews had to be constantly supplied with oxygen. Each compartment had outlets from the central oxygen supply to which a crewmen's mask was attached. Portable emergency oxygen bottles were available for short movements around the plane. If a crewman's oxygen supply was interrupted for any reason, he would quickly lose consciousness. The oxygen supply lines were also a potential fire hazard.

#### 12.1 OXYGEN OUT EFFECTS
Two shell hits to a particular compartment's or crew member's oxygen system (cumulative over the course of a mission) will knock out the oxygen for that compartment or crewman. The first shell hit has no effect. Keep a record on the Mission Chart of all oxygen system hits. When an area's or crew member's oxygen is knocked out, the B-17 must drop out of formation down to 10,000 feet (see section 13.0 Out of Formation). However, if a "vacancy" exists somewhere else in the plane due to the death of another crewmen, the crew member with no oxygen can occupy that position and the B-17 can stay in formation. If a B-17 has been forced down to 10,000 feet by oxygen being knocked out, and later, due to the death of a crew member or members, there is enough vacant functioning oxygen supply to accommodate all surviving crew members, then the B-17 may re-ascend to 20,000 feet to avoid rolling for Light Flak (but may not rejoin the formation).

#### 12.2 OXYGEN FIRES
Oxygen fires can result from shell hit damage in the various occupied sections of the B-17. When an oxygen fire occurs, place one of the Oxygen Fire markers on the appropriate section of the B-17 on the mapboard. There are 5 portable fire extinguishers in the B-17, each represented by a counter placed on the Crew Placement Board at the start of play. Each may be sprayed once, and then it's empty. When an oxygen fire breaks out, one crew member in that compartment (or an adjacent one if the fire breaks out in an empty compartment) must immediately be designated to fight the fire. A crewman may not operate a gun for the remainder of a wave's attack in which he is fighting a fire. The designated crewman may immediately attempt 3 times to put out a fire (i.e., use up 3 extinguishers) by rolling up to three times on Table Bl-3. If the fire is not out after the third try, the crew must immediately bail out on Table G-6. Used extinguishers are removed from play.

### 13.0 OUT OF FORMATION

When a B-17 was forced to drop out of its tight, supportive box formation, its chances of returning to base safely were greatly diminished. Out of formation planes were easier prey for fighters, and had to rely on their own navigation. Out of formation effects begin after the resolution of the fighter wave attack which resulted in the B-17 falling out of formation.

#### 13.1 OUT OF FORMATION EFFECTS
a. Add 1 Me 109 at 12 Level per wave of attacking fighters. If no waves appear, then this Me 109 does not appear either.

b. Any modifications to the roll on Tables B-1 or B-2 due to the B-17's squadron position are changed to 0. Also, ignore the additional fighter that normally appears when a B-17 is the lead or tail bomber. (See 13.1a. above.)

c. Any fighter attacking an out of formation B-17 automatically makes a total of 3 attacks (one initial and two successive) against the B-17. The fighter continues to attack 3 times, even if it fails to hit, unless it is first destroyed or takes a "FBOA" result.

d. If out of formation and at a low altitude (10,000 feet) due to oxygen or heat out, or because it is flying with only 1 or 2 engines working, then the B-17 is within range of light anti-aircraft fire from the ground. Over every zone that is at least partially land (land other than England—see the Flight Log Gazetteer, Chart G-11), roll 2D twice on the Light Flak column of Table O-3 to determine if the B-17 is hit by flak. Resolve any flak hits by consulting Tables O-2 through O-5.

#### 13.2 OUT OF FORMATION OPTIONS
a. A B-17 out of formation within fighter cover range uses fighter cover as per the normal mission procedure.

b. Any B-17 which is out of formation prior to the Bomb Run may immediately abort the mission, turn around, and head for home (see section 8.0 Aborting the Mission). An out of formation B-17 may choose to complete its mission and bomb the target, but this is not recommended.

c. If the target has not been bombed when a B-17 is forced out of formation, the bombs may be jettisoned to negate the possibility of them exploding if the Bomb Bay is hit. The bombs may be jettisoned at any time. Make a note of the loss on the Mission Chart.

### 14.0 REPLACING WOUNDED CREWMEN

Each member of the crew of the B-17 is represented on the Crew Placement Board by his individual counter. Whenever a crew member is wounded or KIA, mark his counter with a wound marker showing the degree of his injury. When a crew member is seriously wounded or KIA, he can no longer fire any guns or perform any other functions. However, another crew member may take over his position. Simply take the counter of the crew member taking over and place it in the position vacated by the wounded man. Remove KIA men from the Crew Placement Board. (They are assumed to be placed in an out of the way section of the plane.) Wounded men must be placed where they have a source of heat and oxygen.

#### 14.1 CREW MOVEMENT
During turns when no waves of attacking fighters appear, or after all fighters are driven off by either friendly fighter cover or other B-17s (by rolling a "No Attackers" result on Table B-3), crew movements are made with no penalty. These safe turns are the only time crew movements may be made if the intercom system is out. If crew movements are made in a zone where the B-17 is attacked, certain penalties accrue. The moving crew members may not fire any guns from either their old or new position, until the attacks (both initial and successive) of one wave of fighters have been resolved. Crew movements can be made within the same compartment with no penalty. For example, the Waist Gunners can switch guns during an attack. There is no penalty for moving a wounded man.

#### 14.2 CREW REPLACEMENT EFFECTS
a. A crew member now occupying another wounded man's position on the Crew Placement Board assumes any damage taken by the position. For example, if the Navigator moves up to the Bombardier's position to replace a seriously wounded Bombardier and fire the Nose Gun, any damage from shell hits that would normally affect or wound the Bombardier now affect the Navigator.

b. Gunners moving to a new gun position can only hit fighters by rolling a 6, and lose any ace bonus. (Exception: the Ball and Top gunners may replace each other, and the Waist gunners may replace each other, with no loss of effectiveness.)

c. Any crew member may fly the B-17 if the Pilot and Copilot are both seriously wounded or KIA, but the first one to take over flying must be the Engineer (someone else may take over the Top Turret if tactically desirable). If the Engineer is subsequently or already seriously wounded or KIA, then anyone else may take over, with appropriate modifiers to the landing (see section 16.0 Landings).

d. Only during an emergency can a single man fly a B-17 for an extended length of time. Therefore, the Pilot and Copilot may not leave their positions to fire guns. If both are still functioning with no worse than a light wound, the Copilot may temporarily vacate his post to fight an oxygen fire. Otherwise, the Pilot and Copilot must stay in their normal positions.

### 15.0 EVASIVE ACTION

Evasive action is the random dips, dives, banks, and weaves that a pilot could put his plane through attempting to dodge enemy fighter attacks. Flying like this necessarily threw off the aim of the plane's gunners, and wasn't possible if the B-17 was heavily damaged. Due to the proximity of friendly planes and the danger of collision, B-17's in formation may not use evasive action.

#### 15.1 EVASIVE ACTION EFFECTS
Evasive action is only allowed for B-17's flying out of formation, and has the following effect:

a. All fighters attacking a B-17 which is performing evasive action subtract 1 from their attacking die rolls on Table M-3 (a roll of 6 is still a hit, regardless of modifications).

b. All guns firing from a B-17 taking evasive action must roll a 6 to hit any attacking fighter, no matter what area of attack it is coming from. Any Ace Gunner bonus is still in effect.

#### 15.2 EVASIVE ACTION RESTRICTIONS
No evasive action is allowed if:

a. The B-17 is still in formation.
b. Two or more engines are out.
c. Control cables are out.
d. The B-17 has accumulated 3 or more negative landing modifiers.
e. Anyone other than the Pilot or Copilot is flying the plane.
f. Any damage previously received specifically disallows taking evasive action.

### 16.0 LANDINGS

The adage "What goes up, must come down" certainly holds true for the 40,000 pound B-17 and its crew of 10 men. Where and how it comes down will determine whether this particular plane and crew gets to fly another mission or not. In this game, as in reality, an occasional B-17 will unfortunately return to earth as chunks of burning and smoking metal. It is more likely, however, to be landed in one piece under the control of its crew.

There are three types of landings which can occur at the end of a mission. The first is a landing in England, the second is a landing in occupied Europe, and the third is a crash landing (or ditching) into the sea. Landings are accomplished by rolling 2D on either Table G-9 or G-10. Damage received in combat plus circumstances described in the notes to these tables may affect the success of the landing by increasing or decreasing the landing dice roll. An unsuccessful landing can mean destruction of the B-17 and death or injury for the crew. Crews of planes downed in the sea face the additional hazards of drowning and exposure.

#### 16.1 LANDING LOCATIONS
The location of the B-17 counter on the Strategic Movement Board determines where the plane will land. Refer to the Flight Log Gazetteer, Chart G-11, and cross-reference the zone the B-17 now occupies with the Mission Target. The letter notation to the right of the slash mark will detail whether the B-17 is over water, land, or over some of both. For example, a B-17 which must land in Zone 3 during a mission to Bremen must land in the water (W). A B-17 which must land in Zone 4 during a mission to Rotterdam has the choice of coming down in the water or in the Netherlands (W-N).

#### 16.2 LANDING IN ENGLAND
A B-17 which reaches Zone 1 is landing in England and is automatically assumed to be landing at an air base. Emergency air strips had been prepared along the coast, and RAF bases were prepared for emergency landings by all types of allied aircraft. Roll for landings in England on Table G-9.

#### 16.3 LANDING IN EUROPE
A B-17 landing in Europe is automatically assumed to be crash landing in some open area, not an airfield. Roll for landings in Europe on Table G-9, subtracting 3 from the roll as per Note j of the table. B-17's which land in Europe are considered lost.

#### 16.4 LANDING IN THE SEA
Landing a B-17 in the sea is an act of desperation, and should only occur if the plane is forced out of the sky in a zone totally over water. Ditching in the sea is preferable only to bailing out into the sea. Roll for landings in water on Table G-10. A B-17 landing in the sea is lost. Crewmen rescued from the sea in Zones 2-5 are returned to England; those rescued from the sea in Zones 6 or 7 are captured.

### 17.0 POST MISSION DEBRIEFING

The return of the B-17 to earth, regardless of its condition or location, is not quite the end of the mission. Before beginning the next mission, players must resolve the fate of any returning seriously wounded and frostbitten crew members (see Table Bl-4 and section 10.0 Heat Out/Frostbite), then log in the results of the just completed mission on the Composite Mission Record. Note the percentage of bombs dropped on the target in the appropriate column. Destroyed B-17s and crew members who will not be flying again, for one reason or another, are "x'd" out. Notes can be added to lost crewmen to describe their fate, such as: KIA (killed in action); DOW (died of wounds); LAS (lost at sea); IH (invalided home); and BO-C (bailed out-captured). Also note enemy fighters destroyed during the mission in order to keep a running tally of a gunner's progress towards ace status. When a bomber or crew member is lost, pencil in a new name in preparation for the next mission. A sample completed Composite Mission Record is included at the end of the Sample Mission in Part II of this rules booklet.

### 18.0 RANDOM EVENTS (Optional Rule)

Random Events have been included as an option for those experienced players wishing to add more detail to their missions. Random Events come into play when a "66" is rolled on Table B-3. Players not wishing to complicate play should treat a roll of "66" as a "No Attackers (c)" result instead. To incorporate Random Events, roll on the following table whenever a "66" is rolled on Table B-3, and implement the result.

> **Errata #7:** The Random Events Table is incorrectly listed as "G-11" in the rules; it should be "B-7".

**B-7 RANDOM EVENTS TABLE** — Roll 2D.

| Roll | Event |
|---|---|
| 2 | Engine failure. (a) |
| 3 | Formation casualties. Roll 1D: 1-3 = You are now the lead bomber; 4-6 = Now tail bomber. (b,h) |
| 4 | Loose formation. Roll to determine enemy fighter waves in zone on Table B-1 or B-2 is +1. (b,i) |
| 5 | Aggressive "Little Friends". Roll for fighter cover defense on Table M-4 is +1 for the remainder of the mission. (b) |
| 6 | Tight formation. Roll to determine enemy fighter waves in zone on Table B-1 or B-2 is -1. (b,j) |
| 7 | Rabbit's foot. You may re-roll any one die or dice roll. (c) |
| 8 | Tight formation. See result #6 above. |
| 9 | Bad Luftwaffe communications. (d) |
| 10 | Extreme cold. Roll 1D for each gun position: 1-5 = No effect; 6 = Gun jammed. (e) |
| 11 | Ace for a day. Roll 1D: 1,2 = Engineer; 3,4 = Ball Gunner; 5,6 = Tail Gunner. This gunner +1 to hit on Table M-1 for remainder of the mission. (f) |
| 12 | Mid-air accident. (g) |

**Notes:**

a) Roll 2D: 2,3,7 = #1 engine out; 4, 10-12 = #2 engine out; 5,6 = #3 engine out; 8,9 = #4 engine out. If this random event is rolled again, the previously failed engine restarts.

b) If this random event is rolled again, ignore and re-roll on the table until another event is rolled.

c) Any roll which you don't like which occurs after you obtain the rabbit's foot may be re-rolled. More than one rabbit's foot may be accumulated during a mission, and they may be carried over to the next mission. Once used, a rabbit's foot is gone.

d) Remove one fighter of your choice from each wave for the remainder of the mission. A second roll of this event cancels its effects, a third restores them, and so on.

e) See the notes to Table M-5 for repairing jammed guns. If you are out of formation at 10,000 feet, ignore this result and re-roll until another is obtained.

f) It is possible to have more than one "Ace for a day", but if one crewman is rolled twice, ignore the second roll and don't roll again. A legitimate ace is unaffected by this event, and don't roll for another crewman.

g) Roll 2D: 2-8 = Close call but no effect; 9,10 = Shallow dive (B-17 falls out of formation for 1 zone and then regains formation); 11 = Steep dive (B-17 falls violently out of formation, bombs tear through the bottom of plane and are lost if still aboard, and roll 1D once for each wing: 1-5 = Wing holds—6 = Wing rips off, crew must bail out on Table G-7. B-17 must abort mission); 12 = Mid-air collision (B-17 destroyed and crew must bail out on Table G-7). If you are out of formation, treat this result as #2, Engine failure, instead.

h) If you are already the lead or tail plane, ignore this result and re-roll until another result is obtained. If you are out of formation, re-roll also.

i) If you are out of formation, add -1 to rolls on Tables B-1 and B-2 for the remainder of the mission.

j) If you are out of formation, add -1 to rolls on Tables B-1 and B-2 for the remainder of the mission.

### 19.0 FLAK BURSTS INSIDE PLANE (BIP)

#### 19.1 COMMENTARY
The word flak comes from the German word fliegerabwehrkanonen, meaning flieger (flyer) + abwehr (defense) + kanonen (cannons), or antiaircraft guns. Most potential bombing targets of any value were protected by batteries of flak guns. When bombers were nearing the target, they had to fly straight and level for several minutes to maximize their accuracy. During these minutes, the bombers were most vulnerable to aimed fire and barrages from the flak guns below. Most flak damage consisted of near misses which could do some internal damage or throw the B-17's aim off. Occasionally, a shell would actually explode inside the plane with generally catastrophic consequences.

#### 19.2 BIP EFFECTS
When a BIP result is rolled on Table O-4, Effect of Flak Hits, it has the following effects:

a. All crewmen in this compartment are KIA.

b. If the area hit is a Wing, the Tail, or the Pilot Compartment, the B-17 dives out of control to the ground and the remaining crewmen immediately bail out according to Table G-7.

c. If the Bomb Bay is hit with the bombs still aboard, the B-17 and crew are destroyed.

d. If the area hit is the Nose, empty Bomb Bay, Radio Room, or Waist, the following occurs:
- The B-17 immediately falls out of formation (see rules section 13.0).
- The B-17 must spend two turns in each following zone, rolling twice for German fighter waves. (If the zone currently occupied is the target zone and flak over the target inflicted the BIP, the B-17 must spend two turns in the target zone after turning around.)
- The B-17 is assumed to have received every damage result possible on the damage table for that compartment. (Examine the correct damage table and assume each number from 2 to 12 has been rolled.) Record this damage on the MC.
- The landing roll on either Tables G-9 or G-10 is -4.
- No evasive action is possible for this plane.
- If the B-17 returns safely to England, it is considered to be irreparably damaged and may not fly further missions.

### 20.0 GERMAN FIGHTER PILOT STATUS (Optional Rule)

At the expense of extended playing time, players may include this provision for Ace and Green German fighter pilots. During the Combat Procedure after the B-17 has allocated its defensive fire and noted any gun positions which are employing spray fire, roll on Table M-6 for each German fighter on the mapboard to determine if the pilot is an Ace or Green Pilot. Mark Ace or Green Pilots with an appropriate marker. The +1 or -1 modifications to B-17 defensive fire rolls against Green and Ace Pilots, respectively, apply to both Tables M-1, B-17 Defensive Fire, and M-5, B-17 Area Spray Fire.

### 21.0 TWO PLAYER RULES

These guidelines are included for those players who wish to actively participate as the German air defenses. The German player rolls the dice for all attacking German fighters (Tables B-1, B-2, B-4, B-5, M-3, and M-6) and for Flak (Tables O-2, 3, 4, and 5). However, the B-17 player rolls the dice for damage done by hits to the bomber, and reveals to the German player only such damage as would be readily visible from outside of the plane (for example, leaking fuel tanks, dead engines, etc.). Any wounded crewmen or non-obvious internal damage is not revealed to the German player, as this knowledge would result in an advantage which German fighters would not, in reality, have. The Crew Placement Chart and Mission Chart should be kept out of the German player's sight. During combat, the German player may choose the area of attack for each reattacking fighter (but may not choose Vertical Dive or Vertical Climb), but only one fighter may be placed at each elevation per clock position.

#### 21.1 REVEAL TO THE GERMAN PLAYER
- Aileron, elevator, rudder, or wing flap inoperable
- BIP flak hits
- B-17 drops out of formation
- B-17 drops to 10,000 feet
- Flak shell hits
- Fuel tank fire, or fuel tank leakage
- Oil tank fire, or oil tank leakage
- Oxygen fire
- Second and all succeeding window hits
- Wing flap inoperable
- Wing root or tailplane root hits

#### 21.2 KEEP SECRET
- Ace status of gunners
- Armament inoperable and MG ammunition remaining
- Autopilot mechanism inoperable
- Bomb hits that don't explode the bombs
- Bomb Bay door hits
- Bomb controls or release mechanism inoperable
- Brakes, tailwheel, or landing gear inoperable
- Compartment heat or electric suit heat out
- Control cables inoperable, or hits on them
- Crew movement on the Crew Placement Board
- First window hit
- Frostbite, wounds, or KIA
- Pilot Compartment instruments or intercom system out
- Navigator's equipment or Norden bombsight inoperable
- Number of missions flown by any crew member
- Oxygen inoperable, or oxygen hits
- Rubber rafts hit
