# Pass 3: Python (pdfplumber) Extraction

## Page 1

THE AVALON HILL GAME COMPANY'S TRADEMARK FOR ITS WWII AERIAL COMBAT GAME
FOR AGES
8 AND UP
nee)
valda Masco ШІ Тһе Avalon Hill Game Company
Staarecy |

## Page 2

Queen of the Skies
THE AVALON HILL GAME COMPANY'S TRADEMARK FOR ITS WWII AERIAL COMBAT GAME

## Page 3

B-17 iesus DIAGRAM
Nose Gun
\
Port Cheek Gun \ Starboard Cheek Gun
PORT ^ \ ^4 STARBOARD
Top Turret,
Inboard Fuel Tank _ Inboard Fuel Tank
Outboard Fuel Tank _ _ _
Aileron
А ~
Radio Room Gun N Ball Turret
"> Starboard Waist Gun
( ‎ ے ک
Port Waist Gun ^7 |
= [|
Са ازا‎
i l І
1 A 1
Elevator , HIN Elevator
^ k
Rudder Tail Guns
25 FEET
rd
Top Turret
Tailplane -
Cheek Gun
(each side) «
“
Nose Gun = ĠO
ч ТЕС;
~ \ Tail Guns
N
N Waist Gun
l ! | | Ball Turret 1( еасһ ѕійе) 1
! l 1 I І
1 l 1 1 1 | 1
! 1 PILOT 1 BOMB | RADIO | 1 1
1 нозе ! comp. | Bay | Room! waist | TAIL І

## Page 4

17: QUEEN OF THE SKIES
PART I: RULES OF PLAY
1.0 INTRODUCTION
which are used to generate the various random events of a
B-17: QUEEN OF THE SKIES re-creates World War II bombing typical bombing mission. The use of the tables is explained in
missions of the famous 8th Air Force Flying Fortresses during section 3.0, Game Tables in Play.
the period of November 1942 to May 1943. This was at rial
2.5 GERMAN FIGHTER CARDS
period for the proponents of strategic daylight bombing. The
There are 16 German fighter cards of three different types: the
green crews had to prove the value of this concept as well as the
Messerschmitt 109 (Me 109), Messerschmitt 110 (Me 110), and
fitness of themselves and their equipment. During these early
months, both the bombers and their German air defense Focke-Wulf 190 (FW 190). These fighter cards will be placed on
the B-17 Mapboard when called for to represent fighters attack-
counterparts were evenly matched, with each side experiment-
ing the В-17.
ing, learning, and looking for an advantage.
2.6 DIE CUT COUNTERSHEET
B-17 is designed as a solitaire game, with the player acting for the
crew of an individual bomber. The actions of the German air The 88 die cut counters are used in play to mark the position of
defenses and the fate of the bomber and crew are randomly the B-17 on the Strategic Movement Board, the position of the
generated by various game aids and tables. Each ‘‘game”’ con- B-17 crew on the Crew Placement Board, the targets of the
sists of a single bombing mission. The ultimate goal is to safely various B-17 machine guns, damage to the B-17, damage to the
complete 25 missions thereby earning a ticket home to a relatively German fighters, and wounds to the B-17 crew.
safe job. In practice, this is rarely achieved and players should
instead try to complete 25 missions with a minimum number of SAMPLE COUNTERS
bombers and crewmen lost.
Because of the nature of the solitaire play system, B-17 makes
extensive use of game aids and tables as a substitute for a live = B-17 Position
German air defense player. Before attempting to fly a mission,
the player should examine all of the game’s components. Their
BOM-
purpose should be apparent. This rules booklet has been divided
BARDIER
into three parts. This first part is the standard game rules which Bombardier
explain in detail how to play. The second part is the step by step
description of an actual game mission, which serves as a pro-
grammed instruction and example of play. Part III consists of BALL $
TURRET Ball Turret MG’s
additional notes, bibliography, and credits. New players should
read Part I through section 7.0, How to Win, and then read MG's
through the sample mission. Experienced game players should
find that this will be enough information to get started, and can
Engine Fire
refer to the detailed rules for special cases. Before starting the 25
mission campaign, it is suggested that a few practice missions be
flown to random targets to learn the game system. FUEL
TANK Fuel Tank Fire
2.0 GAME EQUIPMENT FIRE
BAILOUT
2.1 B-17 MAPBOARD
The principle area of play for B-17 is the 11" 16” mounted Oil Leak
mapboard. The top half of the mapboard is a depiction ofa B-17
in flight, with a landscape visible below. This part of the board is
used to resolve combat between German fighters and the B-17.
Gas Leak
The lower half of the board displays various tables which will be
consulted often during combat. FIGHTER
CON- -1
2.2 B-17 STRATEGIC MOVEMENT BOARD
Fighter Continues Attack TINUES
This map of northwestern Europe shows the area of B-17 bomb- FCA
ing missions during the time period covered by the game. Mark-
ed on the map are all of the potential target cities, and the 8th Air
FIGHTER | Fighter Breaks Off Attack
Force Base in England. The strategic area shown is divided into ша pe S
concentric zones expanding out from the base, each
OFF -2
approximately 50 miles apart. Under normal conditions, the
B-17 travels one zone per turn. When its speed is reduced by
Oxygen Fire
damage, the B-17 may need two turns to travel one zone.
(Regardless of damage, a B-17 will never spend more than two
turns in a zone.)
2.3 CREW PLACEMENT BOARD Fire Extinguisher
X
This board displays the interior of the B-17, and shows where the
various crew members are placed. During play, the wounds and
position changes of crew members will be marked here. Rudder Inoperable
2.4 TABLES AND CHARTS CARDS
The five colored cards display most of the charts and tables

## Page 5

counters and fighter cards should also be close enough to be
LIGHT Light Wound distinguished when needed. The other components do not have
to placed where they are readable, but must be within reach.
WOUND
4.1 FIGHTER CARDS
The three different types of German fighter cards should be
Ace Pilot
stacked to the side of the mapboard until called for. When a
wave of fighters is generated from Table B-3, bring a fighter of
the correct type into play as follows:
Green Pilot
—lIfa German fighter is attacking from a high position, place
GREEN
its card on the landscape portion of the mapboard in its
SPRAY
designated clock position.
FIRE
—If the fighter is attacking from a /eve/ position, place its
Area Spray Fire
card on the blue border of the mapboard in its designated clock
position.
—If the fighter is attacking from a /ow position, place its
2.7 MISSION CHART PAD
card just off the edge of the mapboard in its designated clock
The events of each mission are recorded as they unfold on a position.
Mission Chart. The pad in B-17 includes enough charts for 70 —If the fighter is attacking from av ertical dive, place its card
missions. An example of how the Mission Chart can be used is directly on top of the B-17 on the mapboard.
included with the sample mission in Part II of this rulebook. —1f the fighter is attacking from av ertical climb, place its
card on the blue border of the mapboard in the lower left corner
2.8 COMPOSITE MISSION RECORD
marked ** Vertical Climb".
At the back of the Mission Chart Pad are two Composite
Mission Records. These charts are used to record the results of 4.2 GAME COUNTERS
each of the 25 missions of the Campaign Game. The composite At the beginning of the mission, place all crew and fire
record has space to note personnel changes, bomber losses, and extinguisher counters in their appropriate places on the Crew
the percentage of bombs on target. Placement Board. The B-17 counter is placed in the 8th Air
Force Base space on the Strategic Movement Board.
3.0 GAME TABLES IN PLAY
The remaining counters are placed aside within reach until
Due to the nature ofB -17’s solitaire play system, extensive use of needed. The FCA and FBOA counters mark damage to enemy
various tables has been necessary to generate the many possible fighters. When called for, they are placed directly on top of the
events that could occur during a typical bombing mission. The damaged fighter's card. Counters detailing damage to the B-17
tables which will be consulted during play are found on the are placed directly on the B-17 Mapboard on the location of the
separate colored cards and on the mounted game mapboard. damage. For example, if a fuel tank on the Port Wing is leaking,
a fuel tank leak counter is placed on the Port Wing. The machine
3.1 LOCATING THE TABLES
gun counters are placed on the fighter which the gun is firing at
Each table included in the game has been given a letter-number when defensive fire is allocated. Wound counters are placed on
designation, and a descriptive name. For example, the table the Crew Placement Board to mark wounded crewmen.
which details shell hit damage in the B-17’s Bomb Bay section is
labeled P-3 BOMB BAY. The letter half of the designation
indicates whether the table is on the mapboard or on a card, as
follows: 5.0 SEQUENCE OF PLAY
—M =Mounted mapboard; 5.1 PRE-MISSION STEPS
—O =Orange card;
a. Be sure the B-17 has a name and full crew recorded on the
—P =Pink card;
Composite Mission Record and the Mission Chart. Place all
—B =Buff card;
crew counters in the appropriate positions on the Crew Place-
—BL =Blue card;
ment Board, and have the Strategic Movement Board, game
—G =Green card;
mapboard, playing counters, and all rules and tables at hand.
If the table is on the mapboard or ona card, the number designa-
b. Roll for the mission target city on either Table G-1, G-2, or
tion is the number of that table on the card or board. For example,
G-3 (depending on the number of the mission) and record it on
Bomb Bay Table P-3 is the third table on the Pink card. A com-
the Composite Mission Record and the Mission Chart.
plete list of the tables in B-17 is included on the back page of the
rulebook. c. Roll for the B-17’s position in its squadron (Lead bomber,
tail bomber, or in the middle) on Table G-4 and check the
3.2 USING THE TABLES
corresponding box on the MC. Note that bombers in the lead or
The game tables are used by rolling one or two six-sided dice and tail positions are attacked by an additional fighter per German
reading the result generated off of the table. Throughout the fighter wave as indicated on the MC.
game the notation ‘‘1D’’ means roll one die when consulting this
table, and the notation **2D'' means roll two dice. Tables G-3 d. Roll for the B-17's squadron formation (High, middle, or
and B-3 are special cases. When rolling **2D"' on these tables, low squadron) on Table G-4 and check the corresponding box
on the Mission Chart. Note any modifications to the rolls for
treat the first die as the 10's digit and the second die as the 1’s
enemy fighters on Tables B-1 and B-2 due to the B-17's
digit of a 2 digit number. Rolling two dice on these tables will
squadron formation. (The low squadron was most prone to
thus generate 36 different random numbers ranging from a low
of “11” to a high of “66”. German attack, while the middle squadron was least prone to
attack.)
4.0 PLACING THE GAME EQUIPMENT e. Examine the Flight Log Gazetteer, Chart G-11, to find the
modifications in each zone to the rolls for enemy fighters on
Before beginning, the player should organize the various game
Tables B-1 and B-2. Add these modifications with any for the
components in front of himself in a manner that will facilitate
B-17's squadron position and note them on the Mission Chart.
reference. The Mission Chart, the mounted mapboard, and the
Crew Placement Board should be readily accessible. The player f. Place the B-17 counter on the Strategic Mission Board inside
will be constantly making notes on the first, and the game the map square labelled ‘‘8th Air Force Base’’, facing in the
counters will be in play on the latter two. The remaining game direction of the target city. The mission is ready to begin.

## Page 6

5.2 MISSION STEPS 6.4 GERMAN OFFENSIVE FIRE
a. Each turn, move the B-17 counter one zone closer to the zone a. Roll once on Table M-3 for each surviving fighter to deter-
containing the target (or one zone closer to the base when return- mine if that fighter hits the B-17, taking into account any
ing after bombing the target). modifiers due to damage. Any fighter which does not hit the
b. Roll for fighter cover on Table G-5 (either Poor, Fair, or B-17 is removed from play (exception: see section 13.1).
Good) and record the extent of the fighter cover (either P, F, or b. Whena fighter hits the B-17, roll once on Table B-4 to deter-
G) on the Mission Chart when entering Zones 2, 3, and 4. mine the number of shells which hit the bomber from that
c. Resolve combat initiated by enemy fighters in each zone fighter.
entered (both to and from the target) according to the Combat c. For each shell hit, roll once on Table B-5 under the
Procedure, section 6.0. appropriate clock position of the attacking fighter to determine
d. When the B-17 enters the Designated Target Zone: the section oft he B-17 this shell hit. Record all sections hit on the
Mission Chart.
—Roll for weather over the target on Table O-1, and then
resolve combat according to the Combat Procedure, taking into d. Roll once on the specific damage tables (P-1 through P-6,
account any weather effects. Bl-1, and Bl-2) for each hit to determine and resolve damage
—Resolve anti-aircraft fire by consulting Tables O-2 through done. Record all damage and effects of damage on the Mission
0-5. Chart.
—Resolve the Bomb Run by consulting Tables O-6 and O-7.
6.5 SUCCESSIVE ATTACKS
e. After the Bomb Run is resolved: a. Any fighter which scores a hit in its initial attack on the B-17
—Begin the return flight to England by turning the B-17 (eveni f the hit has no effect) attacks the B-17 again. Roll once on
counter around and facing it towards the 8th Air Force Base. Table B-6 for each fighter making a successive attack to deter-
—Resolve combat again in this zone, still taking into account mine its new attack position, After all fighters conducting suc-
any weather effects (roll again on Table B-2). cessive attacks are positioned, remove the number of fighters
allowed due to successful fighter cover according to the roll on
f. Each subsequent turn of the return flight to base, place the
Table M-4 during the initial attack. Then resolve defensive fire
B-17 counter one zone closer to the 8th Air Force Base, and
and the fighter attacks normally. Fighters not scoring a hit dur-
resolve combat according to the Combat Procedure.
ра this attack are removed from play (exception: see section
g. When the B-17 re-enters Zone 1: 13.1).
—Roll for weather at the base on Table O-1.
b. Fighters which score a hit during their first successive attack
—Place the B-17 counter on the 8th Air Force Base, and roll
conduct a second successive attack as above. After its second
for landing on Table G-9 taking into account all weather effects
successive attack, a fighter is removed from play, even if it
and damage modifiers.
scored hits every time. The most attacks any one fighter can
—After landing, roll separately for each seriously wounded
make against the B-17 during one wave is three—one initial and
crew member according to Note b of Table Bl-4 to determine
two successive attacks.
survival. Also roll for frostbite effects under the rules section
Heat Out/Frostbite, if applicable. 6.6 2ND AND 3RD WAVES
h. Record mission results on Composite Mission Record. Resolve any additional wave attacks according to the Combat
Procedure described for the Ist Wave above. (Roll again for
6.0 COMBAT PROCEDURE fighter cover defense on Table M-4 for each additional wave
while in Zones 2, 3, and 4.) After all attacks have been resolved
6.1 DETERMINE ATTACKERS
completely, continue the mission according to the Mission Steps
a. Roll for the number of waves of intercepting German fighters above.
on Table B-1 (roll on Table B-2 if the B-17 counter is in the
target’s zone).
b. For each separate wave of attackers roll once on Table B-3 to
determine the specific fighters encountered and the clock posi-
tion of their attack. Record the 2D number of each wave (from 7.0 HOW TO WIN
Table B-3) on the Mission Record for reference. (When this
A B-17's bombing results and survival determine whether a mis-
wave’s attack has been resolved, cross out the number.) Place
sion is an 8th Air Force Victory, a German Air Defense Victory,
the fighters on the game mapboard in the proper clock position
or a draw. The cumulative results over 25 missions determine
of their attack.
victory in the Campaign Game. In addition, the survival of an
individual bomber or crew member over several missions can be
6.2 FIGHTER COVER DEFENSE
measured as a relative performance rating.
If the B-17 counter is within Zones 2, 3, or 4, roll on Table M-4 to
7.1 MISSION VICTORY CONDITIONS
determine how many of this wave’s fighters are driven off by
friendly fighter cover. Immediately remove that many fighters A mission is considered an 8th Air Force Victory if the B-17’s
of your choice from the map. If the B-17 is outside of friendly Bomb Run was On Target, and the B-17 returned to England not
fighter cover (in Zones 5-8) ignore this step. irreparably damaged.
6.3 B-17 DEFENSIVE FIRE A mission is considered a German Air Defense Victory if either
the B-17 was destroyed in combat, crashed outside of England,
a. Each available manned MG (machine gun) position may fire
or was irreparably damaged in combat or while landing.
at any one fighter within its field of fire as shown on Table M-1.
Designate the targets of each MG position with the appropriate A Mission is considered a Drawi f the B-17 was unable to bomb
counter. Mark off one burst of ammunition for each MG posi- the target or if the bomb drop was Off Target, but returned to
tion firing. England and was not irreparably damaged either in combat or
b. Rollonceon Table M-1 for each firing MG position to deter- while landing.
mine if the target fighter is hit. 7.2 CAMPAIGN GAME VICTORY CONDITIONS
c. For each hit a fighter receives, roll once on Table M-2 to At the end of the 25 mission campaign, total the number of 8th
determine the damage to the fighter from that hit. Remove Air Force Victories and German Air Defense Victories, and
destroyed fighters, and place FCA and/or FBOA counters on ignore the number of draws. The side with the most victories is
damaged fighters. the winner of the Campaign Game.

## Page 7

7.3 PERFORMANCE RATINGS Gun and the Top Turret are firing at a fighter at 12 O'Clock
High, the counters for the Nose Gun and Top Turret are placed
B-17 AND CREW MEMBER SURVIVAL RATING on that fighter's card. After the gun counters are all placed,
Per plane or per crew member. mark off one burst of ammunition (one box) for each firing gun
on the Mission Chart. Then roll on Table M-1 for each gun to
# OF MISSIONS
determine if the target fighter is hit. When a fighter is hit by
SURVIVED RATING
defensive fire, roll on Table M-2 to determine the extent of the
damage done. The guns in the Nose section and the Tail Guns
1-5 Poor
have special characteristics. Players may optionally employ
6-10 Fair
11-17 Good Area Spray Fire.
18-24 Excellent
9.1 NOSE SECTION GUNS
25 Superb
Due to the limited compartment space, only two crewmen may
Notes: a) A B-17 which survives 25 missions may be retired and be in the Nose section of the B-17. There are three guns in this
sent back to the USA for publicity and morale boosting, or it may section, the Nose, the Starboard Cheek, and the Port Cheek. A
continue to fly. maximum of two of these three guns may be fired at the same
b) A B-17 may survive 25 or more missions while going through time, including the Nose and either of the cheek guns. The two
several sets of crews along the way.
cheek guns may not be fired simultaneously.
c) Any crew member who survives 25 missions is sent home to
the USA. 9.2 TAIL GUNS
d) A B-17 may be destroyed, but surviving crew members con-
German fighters quickly learned that it was very dangerous to
tinue on another plane.
approach a B-17 from the rear, as this put them within range of
the twin guns fora relatively long period of time. When attacks
from the rear dropped off, tail gunners developed a new techni-
BOMB RUN RESULT RATING que: shooting at fighters attacking from the front as they passed
Per plane or group of planes (for multi-plane missions). the rear of the B-17.
Accordingly, the Tail Guns may be allocated to any fighter
BOMB RUN PERCENTAGE RATING
attacking from the 10:30, 12, or 1:30 positions, whether High,
5% Poor Level, or Low. However, this defensive fire is not resolved until
5-14% Fair after all other defensive fire and all German offensive fire is
15-29% Good resolved. Thus the target fighter could be shot down, or the Tail
30% + Excellent Guns themselves be knocked out, before the Tail Guns get a
chance to fire. No ammunition is marked off unless the Tail
Note: The Bomb Run performance ratings can be used to rate
Guns actually shoot. Tail Guns firing in this manner must roll a
the bomb drop of a single mission, the average of several planes
**6" to hit, regardless of the position of the fighter. Tail Guns
on the same mission, or the average of a single plane over a
complete campaign. may not fire in this manner if the intercom is out.
9.3 ACE GUNNERS
8.0 ABORTING THE MISSION
Once a gunner has shot down 5 or more fighters in his career, he
is an Ace Gunner and may add 1 to his defensive fire rolls. Ace
“Aborting a mission” means that the B-17 turns around and
Gunners lose this bonus when frostbitten and when wounded.
heads for home without bombing the target. Historically, the
The bonus is retained if the intercom is knocked out. A gunner
decision to abort or continue was the captain’s, and his word
was final. For purposes of this game, players may choose to becomes an Ace at the instant of his 5th kill, and the bonus takes
effect with his next defensive fire.
abort after resolving all combat in any zone. However, the
aborted mission counts toward the required 25 missions only if 9.4 MACHINE GUN AMMUNITION
any of the following circumstances arise due to German fighter
The ammunition available for each machine gun position per
attacks:
mission is shown on the Mission Chart. Each box next to the gun
a. Bomb Bay doors, intercom, or Norden bombsight in- position's name represents one burst of ammunition. Mark off
operable. one box when a gun position is allocated to fire. When a gun
b. Compartment heat or suit heater inoperable for one or more position runs out of ammunition (all boxes are marked off), it
may borrow additional ammunition from another position.
crewmen.
Ammunition is transferred in increments of 2 bursts (2, 4, 6,
c. Bombardier is seriously wounded or KIA.
etc., bursts at a time). Mark off the boxes from the gun passing
d. If the Navigator is seriously wounded or KIA and the B-17 is the ammunition, and erase marked off boxes for the gun receiv-
out of formation, the B-17 must abort. ing theammunition. Twin gun mounts (Ball, Top, and Tail posi-
tions) may only obtain ammunition from another twin mount.
e. If both the Pilot and Co-pilot are seriously wounded or KIA
Ammunition may only be exchanged during a turn when no
and the B-17 is out of formation, the B-17 must abort.
fighter waves are rolled on Tables B-1 or B-2, or after all attack-
f. Out of formation. ing fighters have been driven off either by friendly fighter cover
or other B-17s.
g. Oxygen out for one or more crewmen.
h. One or more engines out. (If two or more engines are out, 9.5 AREA SPRAY FIRE (Optional Rule)
B-17 must abort.) Except where required above to abort, players Area Spray Fire represents the ''hosing'' of an area with a long
having the option to abort may choose instead to continue the burst of an unaimed spray of bullets. Although usually ineffec-
mission. tive as far as hits were concerned, it could drive away a fighter
due to the bewildering effect of numerous tracer bullets pepper-
9.0 DEFENSIVE FIRE ing the sky the fighter was flying into. The technique of spray
fire was not favored by experienced gunners because 1) it quickly
Begin the Defensive Fire Phase by checking which machine gun
burned up ammunition, 2) was generally ineffective against
positions are manned and finding the counters for those guns.
good pilots, and 3) could jam the gun.
Then examine Table M-1 and the position of the enemy fighters
to determine which guns have target fighters in their field of fire. Area Spray Fire is an optional rule which players may include
Allocate the fire of the B-17's guns by marking the target fighter for additional interest. Place a Spray Fire marker on top of any
with the appropriate counter. For example, if both the Nose gun marker that will spray during the Defensive Fire Phase. l

## Page 8

Mark off three bursts of ammunition for each gun position that and he can hit attacking fighters only by rolling a 6, regardless of
sprays. When the spraying gun fires, resolve its fire on Table the position of their attack.
M-5 instead of Table M-1. Area Spray Fire may not be used
After landing, roll for each frostbitten crew member separately
against any 10:30, 12, 1:30, or Vertical Dive attacks. It may be
to determine the effects of frostbite. Roll 1D: 1,2 — Serious
used against any 3, 6, 9, or Vertical Climb attacks. Ace Gunners
injury/amputation, may not fly again; 3-6 — Recovers, may fly
employing Area Spray Fire do not add 1 to their die roll.
next mission. Also, any frostbitten crew member who is also
10.0 ENGINES OUT seriously wounded adds | to his serious wound survival die roll
(see Note b. under Table BI-4).
One of the strengths of the B-17 design was its four engines.
Crews found that the plane could continue to fly, even with only 12.0 OXYGEN OUT
one engine still functioning. However, the loss of each suc-
ceeding engine, meant new problems and more danger. Because the atmosphere at 20,0004 - feet is so thin, B-17 crews
had to be constantly supplied with oxygen. Each compartment
10.1 ONE ENGINE OUT
had outlets from the central oxygen supply to which a
With one engine out, the B-17 can only stay in formation if it crewmen's mask was attached. Portable emergency oxygen
jettisons its bombs immediately. If the B-17 is already in the bottles were available for short movements around the plane. If
Target Zone when the engine is knocked out, it may bomb the a crewman's oxygen supply was interrupted for any reason, he
target and still remain in formation. Otherwise, if the B-17 would quickly lose consciousness. The oxygen supply lines were
decides to keep its bombs aboard and continues to the target also a potential fire hazard.
with one engine out, it is Out of Formation and must spend 2
12.1 OXYGEN OUT EFFECTS
turns in each zone (while it still has its bombs) due to slowness
caused by the weight of the bombs. The B-17 must therefore roll Two shell hits to a particular compartment's or crew member's
for waves of German fighters twice per zone on either Table B-1 oxygen system (cumulative over the course of a mission) will
or B-2. Once the B-17 has dropped its bombs, it may continue its knock out the oxygen for that compartment or crewman. The
mission at the normal rate of speed of 1 zone per turn. first shell hit has no effect. Keep a record on the Mission Chart
of all oxygen system hits. When an area's or crew member's
10.2 TWO OR THREE ENGINES OUT
oxygen is knocked out, the B-17 must drop out of formation
The B-17 must jettison its bombs, drop from formation, and down to 10,000 feet (see section 13.0 Out of Formation).
spend 2 turns in each zone due to slowing down. Roll for waves However, if a **vacancy"' exists somewhere else in the plane due
of German fighters twice per zone on either Table B-1 or B-2. to the death of another crewmen, the crew member with no
The B-17 must also drop to 10,000 feet and is subject to Light oxygen can occupy that position and the B-17 can stay in forma-
Flak if over land (see section 13.0 Out of Formation). When a tion. If a B-17 has been forced down to 10,000 feet by oxygen
B-17 has two or more engines out, attacking fighters add 1 to being knocked out, and later, dueto the death oafc r ew member
their German Offensive Fire die rolls on Table M-3, and the or members, there is enough vacant functioning oxygen supply
B-17 may not take Evasive Action (see section 15.0). to accommodate all surviving crew members, then the B-17 may
10.3 ONE ENGINE OPERATING re-ascend to 20,000 feet to avoid rolling for Light Flak (but may
not rejoin the formation).
The B-17 may go one zone further, then it must either crash
land, or the crew must bail out on Table G-6. However, the crew 12.2 OXYGEN FIRES
may throw overboard all bombs, guns, ammo, and fire Oxygen fires can result from shell hit damage in the various
extinguishers, and fly 2 zones past the zone in which the third occupied sections of the B-17. When an oxygen fire occurs,
engine was lost. When landing with only one engine, subtract 3 place one of the Oxygen Fire markers on the appropriate section
from the landing roll on Tables G-9 and G-10. (See 10.2 above of the B-17 on the mapboard. There are 5 portable fire ex-
for additional effects.) tinguishers in the B-17, each represented by a counter placed on
the Crew Placement Board at the start of play. Each may be
10.4 NO ENGINES OPERATING sprayed once, and then its empty. When an oxygen fire breaks
The B-17 must either crash land in its present zone on either out, one crew member in that compartment (or an adjacent one
Table G-9 or G-10 (find this zone in the Flight Log Gazetteer to if the fire breaks out in an empty compartment) must im-
determine if the B-17 is over land or water, or if you have a mediately be designated to fight the fire. A crewman may not
choice), or the crew must bail out on Table G-6 (and Table G-8 if operate a gun for the remainder of a wave's attack in which he is
over water). Once the last engine is out, the player must fighting a fire. The designated crewman may immediately at-
immediately choose either to attempt the crash landing or bail tempt 3 times to put out a fire (i.e., use up 3 extinguishers) by
out. If crash landing with all engines out, landing roll is -7 on rolling up to three times on Table BI-3. If the fire is not out after
Table G-9 and -4 on Table G-10. (See 10.2 above for additional the third try, the crew must immediately bail out on Table G-6.
effects.) Used extinguishers are removed from play.
11.0 HEAT OUT/FROSTBITE 13.0 OUT OF FORMATION
The B-17 normally operated above 20,000 feet where the When a B-17 was forced to drop out of its tight, supportive box
temperatures were substantially below freezing. Some crewmen formation, its chances of returning to base safely were greatly
operated in heated compartments, and others wore electrically diminished. Out of formation planes were easier prey for
heated suits which they plugged into the B-17’s circuitry. When fighters, and had to rely on their own navigation. Out of forma-
battle damage or equipment malfunction cut off someone’s tion effects begin after the resolution of the fighter wave attack
heat, the plane had to drop out of formation and descend to an which resulted in the B-17 falling out of formation.
altitude with a more moderate temperature before frostbite
13.1 OUT OF FORMATION EFFECTS
could occur.
a. Add 1 Me 109 at 12 Level per wave of attacking fighters. If
When any crewmen’s suit heat or any compartment heat is out, no waves appear, then this Me 109 does not appear either.
the B-17 may travel one more zone at the current altitude and in
b. Any modifications to the roll on Tables B-1 or B-2 due to the
formation. Thereafter, the B-17 must either descend to 10,000
B-17’s squadron position are changed to 0. Also, ignore the
feet for warmth (no frostbite, but the B-17 is out of formation),
additional fighter that normally appears when a B-17 is the lead
or stay in formation at current altitude and roll for frostbite
or tail bomber. (See 13.1a. above.)
once per zone for each affected crewman. Roll 1D; 1-3 =
Frostbite for that crewman; 4-6 = No frostbite. Once a crew c. Any fighter attacking an out of formation B-17 automatically
member is frostbitten, he remains so for the rest of the mission, makes at otal of 3 attacks (one initial and two successive) against

## Page 9

the B-17. The fighter continues to attack 3 times, even if it fails section 16.0 Landings).
to hit, unless it is first destroyed or takes a “FBOA”” result.
d. Only during an emergency can a single man fly a B-17 for an
d. Ifoutof formation and at a low altitude (10,000 feet) due to extended length of time. Therefore,the Pilot and Copilot may
oxygen or heat out, or because it is flying with only 1 or 2 engines not leave their positions to fire guns. If both are still functioning
working, then the B-17 is within range of light anti-aircraft fire with no worse than a light wound, the Copilot may temporarily
from the ground. Over every zone that is at least partially land vacate his post to fight an oxygen fire. Otherwise, the Pilot and
(land other than England—see the Flight Log Gazetteer, Chart Copilot must stay in their normal positions.
G-11), roll 2D twice on the Light Flak column of Table O-3 to
determine if the B-17 is hit by flak. Resolve any flak hits by con- 15.0 EVASIVE ACTION
sulting Tables O-2 through O-5.
Evasive action is the random dips, dives, banks, and weaves that
13.2 OUT OF FORMATION OPTIONS a pilot could put his plane through attempting to dodge enemy
a. A B-17 out of formation within fighter cover range uses fighter attacks. Flying like this necessarily threw off the aim of
fighter cover as per the normal mission procedure. the plane's gunners, and wasn't possible if the B-17 was heavily
damaged. Due to the proximity of friendly planes and the
b. Any B-17 which is out of formation prior to the Bomb Run
danger of collision, B-17's in formation may not use evasive
may immediately abort the mission, turn around, and head for
action.
home (see section 8.0 Aborting the Mission). An out of forma-
tion B-17 may choose to complete its mission and bomb the 15.1 EVASIVE ACTION EFFECTS
target, but this is not recommended. Evasive action is only allowed for B-17's flying out of forma-
tion, and has the following effect:
c. If thetarget has not been bombed when a B-17 is forced out
of formation, the bombs may be jettisoned to negate the a. All fighters attacking a B-17 which is performing evasive
possibilitiy of them exploding if the Bomb Bay is hit. The bombs action subtract 1 from their attacking die rolls on Table M-3 (a
may be jettisoned at any time. Make a note of the loss on the roll of6 i s still a hit, regardless of modifications).
Mission Chart.
b. All guns firing from a B-17 taking evasive action must roll a6
to hit any attacking fighter, no matter what area of attack it is
14.0 REPLACING WOUNDED CREWMEN
coming from. Any Ace Gunner bonus is still in effect.
Each member of the crew of the B-17 is represented on the Crew
15.2 EVASIVE ACTION RESTRICTIONS
Placement Board by his individual counter. Whenever a crew
No evasive action is allowed if:
member is wounded or KIA, mark his counter with a wound
marker showing the degree of his injury. When a crew member a. The B-17 is still in formation.
is seriously wounded or KIA, he can no longer fire any guns or
b. Two or more engines are out.
perform any other functions. However, another crew member
may take over his position. Simply take the counter of the crew c. Control cables are out.
member taking over and place it in the position vacated by the d. The B-17 has accumulated 3 or more negative landing
wounded man. Remove KIA men from the Crew Placement
modifiers.
Board. (They are assumed to placed in an out of the way section
e. Anyone other than the Pilot or Copilot is flying the plane.
of the plane.) Wounded men must be placed where they have a
source of heat and oxygen. f. Any damage previously received specifically disallows taking
evasive action.
14.1 CREW MOVEMENT
During turns when no waves of attacking fighters appear, or
after all fighters are driven off by either friendly fighter cover or
other B-17s (by rolling a “Мо Attackers’’ result on Table B-3), 16.0 LANDINGS
crew movements are made with no penalty. These safe turns are
The adage **What goes up, must come down" certainly holds
the only time crew movements may be made if the intercom
true for the 40,000 pound B-17 and its crew of 10 men. Where
system is out. If crew movements are made in a zone where the
and how it comes down will determine whether this particular
B-17 is attacked, certain penalties accrue. The moving crew
plane and crew gets to fly another mission or not. In this game,
members may not fire any guns from either their old or new
as in reality, an occasional B-17 will unfortunately return to
position, until the attacks (both initial and successive) of one
earth as chunks of burning and smoking metal. It is more likely,
wave of fighters have been resolved. Crew movements can be
however, to be landed in one piece under the control of its crew.
made within the same compartment with no penalty. For exam-
ple, the Waist Gunners can switch guns during an attack. There There are three types of landings which can occur at the end of a
is no penalty for moving a wounded man. mission. The first is a landing in England, the second is a landing
in occupied Europe, and the third is a crash landing (or ditching)
14.2 CREW REPLACEMENT EFFECTS
into the sea. Landings are accomplished by rolling 2D on either
a. A crew member now occupying another wounded man's Table G-9 or G-10. Damage received in combat plus cir-
position on the Crew Placement Board assumes any damage cumstances described in the notes to these tables may affect the
taken by the position. For example, if the Navigator moves up success of the landing by increasing or decreasing the landing
to the Bombardier's position to replace a seriously wounded dice roll. An unsuccessful landing can mean destruction of the
Bombardier and fire the Nose Gun, any damage from shell hits B-17 and death or injury for the crew. Crews of planes downed
that would normally affect or wound the Bombardier now in the sea face the additional hazards of drowning and exposure.
affect the Navigator.
16.1 LANDING LOCATIONS
b. Gunners moving to a new gun position can only hit fighters
The location of the B-17 counter on the Strategic Movement
by rolling a 6, and lose any ace bonus. (Exception: the Ball and
Board determines where the plane will land. Refer to the Flight
Top gunners may replace each other, and the Waist gunners
Log Gazetteer, Chart G-11, and cross-reference the zone the
may replace each other, with no loss of effectiveness.)
B-17 now occupies with the Mission Target. The letter notation
c. Any crew member may fly the B-17 if the Pilot and Copilot to the right of the slash mark will detail whether the B-17 is over
are both seriously wounded or KIA, but the first one to take water, land, or over some of both. For example, a B-17 which
over flying must be the Engineer (someone else may take over must land in Zone3 duringa mission to Bremen must land in the
the Top Turret if tactically desirable). If the Engineer is subse- water (W). A B-17 which must land in Zone 4 during a mission
quently or already seriously wounded or KIA, then anyone else to Rotterdam has the choice of coming down in the water or in
may take over, with approriate modifiers to the landing (see the Netherlands (W-N).

## Page 10

16.2 LANDING IN ENGLAND Notes: a) Roll 2D: 2,3,7 = #1 engine out; 4, 10-12 = #2 engine out; 5,6
A B-17 which reaches Zone 1 is landing in England and is = #3 engine out; 8,9 = #4 engine out. If this random event is rolled
again, the previously failed engine restarts.
automatically assumed to be landing at an air base. Emergency
air strips had been prepared along the coast, and RAF bases b) If this random event is rolled again, ignore and re-roll on the table
were prepared for emergency landings by all types of allied air- until another event is rolled.
craft. Roll for landings in England on Table G-9. c) Any roll which you don’t like which occurs after you obtain the
rabbit’s foot may be re-rolled. More than one rabbit’s foot may be
16.3 LANDING IN EUROPE
accumulated during a mission, and they may be carried over to the next
A B-17 landing in Europe is automatically assumed to be crash mission. Once used, a rabbit’s foot is gone.
landing in some open area, not an airfield. Roll for landings in
Europe on Table G-9, subtracting 3 from therollas per Note j of d) Remove one fighotfey orur choice from each wave for the remainder
the table. B-17's which land in Europe are considered lost. of the mission. A second roll of this event cancels its effects, a third
restores them, and so on.
16.4 LANDING IN THE SEA
e) See the notes to Table M-5 for repairing jammed guns. If you are out
Landing a B-17 in the sea is an act of desperation, and should of formation at 10,000 feet, ignore this result and re-roll until another is
only occur if the plane is forced out of the sky in a zone totally obtained.
over water. Ditching in the sea is preferable only to bailing out
f) It is possible to have more than one '*Ace for a day’’, but if one
into the sea. Roll for landings in water on Table G-10. A B-17 crewman is rolled twice, ignore the second roll and don't roll again. A
landing in the sea is lost. Crewmen rescued from the sea in Zones legitimate ace is unaffected by this event, and don't roll for another
2-5 arereturned to England; those rescued from the sea in Zones crewman,
6 or 7 are captured. g) Roll 2D: 2-8 = Close call but no effect; 9,10 = Shallow dive (B-17
falls out of formation for 1 zone and then regains formation); 11 =
17.0 POST MISSION DEBRIEFING
Steep dive (B-17 falls violently out of formation, bombs tear through
the bottom of plane and are lost if still aboard, and roll 1D once for each
The return of the B-17 to earth, regardless of its condition or
wing: 1-5 = Wing holds—6 = Wing rips off, crew must bailout on
location, is not quite the end of the mission. Before beginning
Table G-7. B-17 must abort mission; 12 = Mid-air collision (B-17
the next mission, players must resolve the fate of any returning destroyed and crew must bailout on Table G-7). If you are out of forma-
seriously wounded and frostbitten crew members (see Table tion, treat this result as /2, Engine failure, instead.
Bl-4 and section 10.0 Heat Out/Frostbite), then log in the
h) If you are already the lead or tail plane, ignore this result and re-roll
results of the just completed mission on the Composite Mission until another result is obtained. If you are out of formation, re-roll also.
Record. Note the percentage of bombs dropped on the target in
i) If you are out of formation, add - 1 to rolls on Tables B-1 and B-2 for
the appropriate column. Destroyed B-17s and crew members the remainder of the mission.
who will not be flying again, for one reason or another, are
j) If you are out of formation, add -1 to rolls on Tables B-1 and B-2 for
'*x' d" out. Notes can be added to lost crewmen to describe their
the remainder of the mission.
fate, such as: KIA (killed in action; DOW (died of wounds);
LAS (lost at sea); IH (invalided home); and BO-C (bailed out- 19.0 FLAK BURSTS INSIDE PLANE (BIP)
captured). Also note enemy fighters destroyed during the
19.1 COMMENTARY
mission in order to keep a running tally of a gunner's progress
towards ace status. When a bomber or crew member is lost, The word flak comes from the German word fliegerab-
pencil in a new name in preparation for the next mission. A wehrkanonen, meaning flieger flyer + abwehr defense +
sample completed Composite Mission Record is included kanonen cannons, or antiaircraft guns. Most potential bombing
at the end of the Sample Mission in Part II of this rules booklet. targets of any value were protected by batteries of flak guns.
When bombers were nearing the target, they had to fly straight
and level for several minutes to maximize their accuracy. During
18.0 RANDOM EVENTS (Optional Rule) these minutes, the bombers were most vulnerable to aimed fire
and barrages from the flak guns below. Most flak damage con-
Random Events have been included as an option for those
sisted of near misses which could do some internal damage or
experienced players wishing to add more detail to their missions.
throw the B-17’s aim off. Occasionally, a shell would actually
Random Events come into play when a '*66"' is rolled on Table
explode inside the plane with generally catastrophic conse-
B-3. Players not wishing to complicate play should treat a roll of quences.
“66” as a '*No Attackers (c)'' result instead. To incorporate
Random Events, roll on the following table whenever a ‘‘66”’ is 19.2 BIP EFFECTS
rolled on Table B-3, and implement the result. When a BIP result is rolled on Table O-4, Effect of Flak Hits, it
has the following effects:
G-11 RANDOM EVENTS TABLE
a. All crewmen in this compartment are KIA.
Roll 2D.
b. Ifthe area hit is a Wing, the Tail, or the Pilot Compartment,
ROLL EVENT the B-17 dives out of control to the ground and the remaining
crewmen immediately bailout according to Table G-7.
2 Engine failure. (a)
3 Formation casualties. Roll 1D: 1-3 = You are now the lead c. If the Bomb Bay is hit with the bombs still aboard, the B-17
bomber; 4-6 = Now tail bomber. (b,h) and crew are destroyed.
4 Loose formation. Roll to determine enemy fighter waves in d. Ifthe area hit is the Nose, empty Bomb Bay, Radio Room, or
zone on Table B-1 or B-2 is +1. (b,i)
Waist, the following occurs:
5 Aggressive ‘‘Little Friends’. Roll for fighter cover defense on
Table M4 is 4 1 for the remainder of the mission. (b) —The B-17 immediately falls out of formation (see rules sec-
5 Tight formation. Roll to determine enemy fighter waves in tion 13.0).
zone on Table B-1 or B-2 is -1. (b,j) --Тһе В-17 must spend two turns in each following zone,
7 Rabbit's foot. You may re-roll any one die or dice roll. (c) rolling twice for German fighter waves. (If the zone currently
8 Tight formation. See result #6 above.
occupied is the target zone and flak over the target inflicted the
9 Bad Luftwaffe communications. (d)
BIP, the B-17 must spend two turns in the target zone after turn-
10 Extreme cold. Roll 1D for each gun positon: 1-5 = No effect; 6
ing around.)
= Gun jammed. (e)
—The B-17 is assumed to have received every damage result
11 Ace for a day. Roll 1D: 1,2 = Engineer; 3,4 = Ball Gunner; 5,6
= Tail Gunner. This gunner +1 to hit on Table M-1 for possible on the damage table for that compartment. (Examine
remainder of the mission. (f) the correct damage table and assume each number from 2 to 12
12 Mid-air accident. (g) has been rolled.) Record this damage on the MC.

## Page 11

— The landing roll on either Tables G-9 or G-10 is -4. Climb), but only one fighter may be placed at each elevation per
— № evasive action is possible for this plane. clock position. For example, during the fighter’s first successive
—If the B-17 returns safely to England, it is considered to be attack, the German player may only place one fighter at 12
irreparably damaged and may not fly further missions. O'Clock High. If the German player instead elects to roll for
successive attack fighter placement, it is possible to have more
20.0 GERMAN FIGHTER PILOT STATUS than one fighter appear in the same location.
(Optional Rule)
21.1 REVEAL TO THE GERMAN PLAYER
At the expense of extended playing time, players may include
Aileron, elevator, rudder, or wing flap inoperable
this provision for Ace and Green German fighter pilots. During
BIP flak hits
the Combat Procedure after the B-17 has allocated its defensive
B-17 drops out of formation
fire and noted any gun positions which are employing spray fire, B-17 drops to 10,000 feet
roll on Table M-6 for each German fighter on the mapboard to Flak shell hits
determine if the pilot is an Ace or Green Pilot. Mark Ace or Fuel tank fire, or fuel tank leakage
Green Pilots with an appropriate marker. The +1 or -1 Oil tank fire, or oil tank leakage
modifications to B-17 defensive fire rolls against Green and Ace Oxygen fire
Second and all succeeding window hits
Pilots, respectively, apply to both Tables M-1, B-17 Defensive
Wing flap inoperable
Fire, and M-5, B-17 Area Spray Fire.
Wing root or tailplane root hits
21.0 TWO PLAYER RULES 21.2 KEEP SECRET
These guidelines are included for those players who wish to Ace status of gunners
Armament inoperable and MG ammunition remaining
actively participate as the German air defenses. The German
Autopilot mechanism inoperable
player rolls the dice for all attacking German fighters (Tables
Bomb hits that don’t explode the bombs
B-1, B-2, B-4, B-5, M-3, and M-6) and for Flak (Tables O-2, 3,
Bomb Bay door hits
4, and 5). However, the B-17 player rolls the dice for damage Bomb controls or release mechanism inoperable
done by hits to the bomber, and reveals to the German player Brakes, tailwheel, or landing gear inoperable
only such damage as would be readily visible from outside of the Compartment heat or electric suit heat out
plane (for example, leaking fuel tanks, dead engines, etc.). Any Control cables inoperable, or hits on them
wounded crewmen or non-obvious internal damage is not Crew movement on the Crew Placement Board
revealed to the German player, as this knowledge would result First window hit
Frostbite, wounds, or KIA
in an advantage which German fighters would not, in reality,
Pilot Compartment instruments or intercom system out
have. The Crew Placement Chart and Mission Chart should be
Navigator's equipment or Norden bombsight inoperable
kept out of the German player's sight. During combat, the
Number of missions flown by any crew member
German player may choose the area of attack for each re- Oxygen inoperable, or oxygen hits
attacking fighter (but may not choose Vertical Dive or Vertical Rubber rafts hit
PARTII B-1 QUEEN OF SAMPLE MISSION
THE SKIES
NOTE: The following sample mission has been conducted 1.3 Miss Cue's position and squadron formation are now deter-
without the use of any of the optional rules. Numbers bracketed mined. A 2D roll is made, and in this case the two numbers are
by quotation marks (‘‘2’’) represent either a dice roll result or a totaled. The number rolled is a ‘‘7’’, and the result for that
net dice roll result after the number rolled has been modified by number from the Formation Position half of Table G-4 is
game circumstances. The complete Mission Chart of the sample ““Middle”. This places the B-17 somewhere in the middle of its
mission is included at the end of the sample mission text. Also squadron. (A roll of ''2'' would have made Miss Cue the lead
included is a complete campaign game Composite Mission bomber, and a roll of ''12'' would have made her the tail
Record provided as an example. The marks and notations bomber. These are more vulnerable and dangerous positions,
shown on these samples are intended primarily as examples. each attracting an additional fighter per wave as shown on the
Any code or notation that you invent to embody the required in- MC.) The box marked ''Middle'' under B-17 Position in For-
formation is acceptable. mation on the MC is checked. Next roll 1D on the second part of
Table G-4, Squadron Position. The roll is a ''4'', placing Miss
1.0 PRE-MISSION STEPS
Cue in the Middle Squadron, which is the safest part of the for-
mation. Check the box marked ‘‘Middle’’ under Squadron
1.1 For this sample mission, a new bomber and crew will be
Position on the MC.
selected. The bomber’s name is ‘‘Miss Cue’’, and this is noted
on both the Mission Chart (MC)and the Composite Mission
B-17 POSITION IN FORMATION:
Record. Names are given to all the crew members and noted on
the Composite Mission Record. OD LEAD (1 Me 109/12 High)
1,2 This sample mission is assumed to be Mission #11 of a 25
MIDDLE
mission campaign. Therefore, a 2D roll is made on Table G-3 to
determine the target city. The colored die shows a ‘‘2”’, and the CO TAIL (+Me1 109 /6 High)
white die shows a ''5''. The result of the roll is thus “25”, and
the target is an industrial complex outside of Paris, France. The SQUADRON POSITION:
target city and type are noted on both the MC and the Com-
posite Mission Record. C HIGH
и MIDDLE (-1)
BOMBER NAME: . MISS CUE
О Low (+1)
mission4 11 (THIS BOMBER _ 1 )
TARGET city: . PARIS TARGET TYPE: IND —
1.4 Examine the Flight Log Gazetteer, Chart G-11, to check the
effect of the mission’s course on expected German resistance.

## Page 12

On the gazetteer’s row marked Paris, are the following nota- white die і5 а “2”, Ғога гевшіс оҒ “32”, For a roll of **32"', the
tions: -2/W under Zone 2, and 0/F under Zones 3, 4, and 5. table reads: ''Two 190's: 10:30 High and 3 Level'', Note the roll
This information reveals that in Zone 2 Miss Cue will be over of ''32'' in the Fighter Waves section of the MC in the box
water (the English Channel), and in Zones 3, 4, and 5 she will be marked ““Out”” under Zone 3.
over France. Additionally, rolls on Tables B-1 and B-2 for
enemy fighter waves will -2 in Zone 2 and unchanged in Zones 3,
4.5 Take two FW 190 fighter cards and place them on the
4, and 5. These modifications, plus the -1 benefit Miss Cue
mounted mapboard in the positions of their attack. The first is
receives from being in the Middle Squadron (as shown on the
placed directly in front of the B-17, entirely on the mapboard
MC), are noted in the Fighter Waves section of the MC. The net
(12 O’Clock High). The second is place off the B-17’s starboard
modification to rolls on Tables B-1 and B-2 will be -3 in Zone 2,
wing, half on and half off the mapboard (3 O’Clock Level).
-1 in Zone 3, -1 on Zone 4, and -1 in Zone 5.
4.6 Rollon Table M-4 to determine the effect of friendly fighter
cover defense. The roll is a ‘*3’’. Under ''Good'' cover (as deter-
FIGHTER WAVES:
mined in 4.2 above), a “*3’’ reads: ‘‘2(1)’’. Fighter cover drives
223 و‎
ZONE off two fighters from the attacking wave, of the player’s choice.
Since the wave consists of only two fighters, they are both
OUT removed from the map, ending the attack. Draw a line through
the '*32" in the Fighter Waves section of the MC to mark that
that wave attack has been resolved.
4.7 Miss Cue has safely passed through Zone 3 and moves into
Zone 4.
1.5 The B-17 counter representing Miss Cue is placed on the 8th
Air Force Base on the Strategic Movement Board pointed
5.0 TURN 4
toward Paris.
5.1 The B-17 counter is moved to Zone4, still pointing to Paris.
2.0 TURN 1
5.2 Roll 1D on Table G-5 for fighter cover: “1” = “Poor”
On Turn 1 the B-17 counter is moved into Zone 1. No German fighter cover. Mark a ““P” in the Fighter Cover section of the
fighter interception is possible in this zone, so no roll is made for MC for Zone 4 under “Ош”.
friendly fighter cover. Miss Cue passes through Zone 1
5.3 Roll 1D on Table B-1 for enemy fighter waves: “6” -1 = 5
untroubled.
= One wave.
3.0 TURN 2 5.4 Roll 2D on Table B-3 to determine the size and position of
the attacking wave: ‘“5’’ and "6" = "56" = “No Attackers”.
3.1 On Turn 2 the B-17 counter is moved into Zone 2, toward
Since Miss Cue is still in formation, the machine gun fire from
Paris.
surrounding B-17’s has driven off any fighter’s that would have
3.2 Roll 1D on Table G-5 to determine the extent of friendly otherwise attacked her.
fighter cover. The roll is a "4", resulting in ‘‘Fair’’ fighter
5.5 Miss Cue has safely passed through Zone 4, and now moves
cover. Note the fighter cover in the Fighter Cover section of the
into Zone 5.
MC by putting an ‘‘F”’ in the Zone 2 box under ‘‘Out’’.
6.0 TURN 5: FIGHTER ATTACKS
FIGHTER COVER:
6.1 The B-17 counter is moved over Paris in Zone 5, pointing
OUT BACK away from England.
6.2 Roll 2D on Table O-1 to determine the weather in the target
zone: “‘8’ = “Good”* weather. Mark the weather with a ““G”*
in the Weather Section of the MC. Good weather has no adverse
effects on either enemy fighter waves or the Bomb Run.
WEATHER:
3.3 Roll 1D on Table B-1 to determine if Miss Cue is attacked
TARGET- GOOD
by German fighter waves in this zone. Table B-1 is consulted
because this is not the Designated Target Zone. (The Designated
6.3 Since Zone 5 is outside of friendly fighter cover, there is no
Target Zone is Zone 5 because it contains Paris, the target city.) roll on Table G-5.
The roll is a **3'*, which is modified by -3, for a net roll of "0",
(The roll is modified by -2 for the zone according to the Flight 6.4 Roll 1D on Table B-2 (Zone 5 is the designated target zone):
Log Gazetteer, and -1 for being in the Middle Squadron.) A net “3” = one wave.
roll of ‘‘0’’or less on Table B-1 is treated as a ‘‘1’’ and results in
6.5 Roll 2D on Table B-3: ''4" апа “4” - “44” = “Two
no enemy waves appearing.
190's: 12 O'Clock High and 12 O'Clock Low; 109: 1:30 Level;
3.4 Since no enemy fighters appear, Miss Cue passes through 110: 6O'Clock Low’’. Note ‘‘44’’ in the fighter waves section of
this zone again untroubled. the MC for Zone 5, under **Out".
6.6 Place the fighter cards on the mapboard in the position of
4.0 TURN 3 their attack:
4.1 The B-17 counter is now moved into Zone 3. —An FW 190 at 12 O'Clock entirely on the mapboard
(High);
4.2 Roll ID on Table G-5 for fighter cover: '*6" = Good
—An FW 190 at 12 O’Clock entirely off the mapboard
fighter cover. A “G” is marked in the Fighter Cover section of
(Low);
the MC in the Zone 3 box under “Out”.
—An Me 109 at 1:30 half on the mapboard (Level);
4.3 Roll 1D on Table B-1 for German fighter waves: **4" - 1 = —An Me 110 at 6 O’Clock entirely off the mapboard (Low).
“3” = One enemy wave attacks.
6.7 Examine Table M-1, B-17 Defensive Fire, to find which
4.4 Roll2D on Table B-3 to determine the size of the attacking machine gun positions can bear on the German fighters and
wave of German fighters. The colored die is a ‘‘3’’, and the what roll the guns must make to hit. Place counters for the
11

## Page 13

machine guns on the target fighters as follows: CREW NOTES:
—The Starboard Cheek gun fires at the Me 109a t 1:30 Level, BOMBARDIER
and must roll a 6 to hit.
—The Tail Guns fire at the Me 110 at 6 O’Clock Low, and NAVIGATOR
must roll a 3, 4, 5, or 6 to hit.
—The Top Turret and Nose Guns fire at the FW 190 at 12 PILOT ыа
O’Clock High, and both must roll a6 to hit.
—The Ball Turret fires at the FW 190 at 12 O’Clock Low, COPILOT SEвW ыз .
and must roll a 6 to hit.
One ammunition box is marked off on the MC for each of the 6.14 Roll 2D on Table P-6, Tail Section, to determine shell hit
firing machine guns. (Note that whether or not a gun fires, or damage to the Tail Section: ‘‘7”” = Rudder. Note one rudder hit
in the Damage Notes section of the MC.
which target it fires at if has several choices, is a player decision.
For example, in 6.7 above, the Ball Turret could fire instead at
the Me 110 at 6 O'Clock low.)
B-17 DAMAGE NOTES:
AMMO: START GUN RUDDER HITS:f
15 NOSE
6.15 The German Fighter which hit the B-17 makes a Successive
10 PORT CHEEK
Attack. Roll 2D on Table B-6, Successive Attacks, to determine
10 STARBD. CHEEK the new attack position of the FW 190: **5" — 12 O’Clock
Level.
16 TOP TURRET
6.16 The FW 190 fighter card is placed at 12 O'Clock, half on
the mapboard (Level). According to Table M-1,only the Top
10 RADIO
Turret and Nose Guns may fire at this position, and both need
20 BALL TURRET to roll a 6 to hit. However, the special rules for the Tail Guns,
rules section 9.2, allow the Tail Guns a passing shot at the
20 PORT WAIST fighter after the German Offensive Fire Phase. Mark off
ammunition for the Top Turret and Nose Guns. Neither of
20 STARBD. WAIST these positions roll a 6, so the fighter attacks needing to roll a 5
or 6. It fails, but is not removed from play yet because the Tail
23 ТАП ИҮГІТІТІПІТІ
Guns now get their shot as the fighter passes the rear of B-17.
Mark off one box of ammunition for the Tail Guns. The Tail
6.8 Roll 1D on Table M-1 for each machine gun: Starboard Guns must roll a 6 to hit (according to rules section 9.2) and fail.
Cheek—‘‘6”” = Hit; Tail Guns—‘‘4”’ = Hit; Top Turret—‘‘1”” Now the fighter is removed from play. This ends fighter attacks
7 Miss; Nose Gun—**1" — Miss; Ball Turret—'*5" = Miss. for Turn 5.
6.9 Roll 1D on Table M-2, Hit Damage Against German 7.0 TURN 5—TARGET FLAK
Fighter, for the hit on the Me 109 and the hit on the Me 110. Roll
(ANTI-AIRCRAFT FIRE)
against the Me 109: “1” = “FCA” (Fighter is damaged, but
continues attack with offensive fire roll -1). Roll against the Me 7.1 Roll 1D on Table O-2, Flak Over Target, to determine how
110: “4” + 1 (twin guns bonus) = “5” = Fighter destroyed heavy the German flak is over the target: ‘‘4’” = Medium flak.
and may not fire at the B-17. Remove the Me 110 card from the
map, and note the kill on the MC next to the Tail Gunner. 7.2 Roll 2D three times (as indicated) on Table O-3, Flak to Hit
B-17, under the Medium column, to determine if flak hits the
6.10 Roll 1D on Table M-3, German Offensive Fire, for each B-17: “5” = Miss; “7” = Hit; “8” = Miss. The B-17 has
surviving fighter: FW 190 12 O'Clock High—‘‘5”” = Hit; FW taken one flak hit.
190 12 O’Clock Low—‘‘1’’ = Miss; Me 109 1:30 Level—‘‘3”” —
7.3 Roll 1D on Table O-4, Effects of Flak Hits, to determine
1 (this fighter took an FCA result during the B-17 defensive fire)
the effect of each flak hit: “7” = 1 hit. The flak hit is the
- “2” - Miss. The FW 190at 12 O'Clock Low and the Me 109
equivalent of one shell hit.
at 1:30 Level are removed from play because they missed.
6.11 Roll 2D on Table B-4, Shell Hits By Area, to determine 7.4 Roll 2D on Table O-5, Area Affected by Flak Hits, to deter-
mine where the flak shell has hit the B-17: “6” = Port Wing.
how many shells have hit the B-17: **5" — 2x 1.5 (FW 190s hell
Record the Port Wing hit in the Hit Notes section of the MC.
hits are x1.5 the number on the table due to their heavy arma-
ment, see Note [a], Table B-4) = 3 shell hits. Record ‘‘3 hits—12 7.5 Roll 2D on Table BI-1, Wing, to determine the damage to
O'Clock High" in the Hit Notes section of the MC. the Port Wing from the flak shell hit: '*12" — Landing Gear.
Roll 1D: **4" = Landing Gear Inoperable. Note that the land-
ing gear is inoperable in the Damage Notes section of the MC,
HIT NOTES: 3H=/2H: PE-TAIL and circle the **-3" box in the row *'Land"' of the Landing
Modifiers section.
LANDING MODIFIERS:
menuzz
6.12 Roll 2D three times on Table B-5, Area Damage Tables, Гәш |5454
under Attack From 12 O'Clock (High) to determine which B-17
compartments have been hit: “4” = Superficial damage (No
effect); 7" = Pilot Compartment; and “10” = Tail. Note
Pilot Compartment and Tail in the Hit Notes section of the MC.
6.13 Roll 2D on Table P-2, Pilot Compartment, to determine
8.0 TURN 5—BOMB RUN
shell hit damage: '**5" = Copilot. Roll for Copilot wound on
Table Bl-4, Wounds: ‘‘2”” = Light Wound. Note ‘‘LW” for the 8.1 Roll 1D on Table 0-6, Bomb Run, to determine whether the
Copilot on the MC, and put a Light Wound marker on the bombs land on or off target: ‘5’? - 1 (B-17 hit by flak over
Copilot counter on the Crew Placement Board. target) — ''4'' — On Target.
12

## Page 14

8.2 Roll 2D on Table O-7, Bombing Accuracy, to determine the 9.11 Roll 2D on Table P-4 to determine Radio Room damage:
percentage of the bombs hitting within 1000 feet of the aiming “6” = Radio Operator. Roll 1D on Table BI-4 for wounds: ‘‘2”’
point: “9” = 20%. Note ‘‘20%’’ inthe Bomb Run % section of = Light wound. Mark the Radio Operator as lightly wounded
the MC. on the MC and Crew Placement Board. Cross out the note
“ВК” on the MC.
BOMB RUN %
20 To 9.12 Roll 2D on Table P-6 to determine Tail damage: “7” -
Rudder. Record on the MC that the rudder has taken a second
8.3 The Bomb Run completes Turn 5 and the outward leg of the hit. Cross out the note “Тай!” оп (ће МС.
mission.
9.13 Mark off one box of ammo for the Tail Guns. Roll 1D
9.0 TURN 6 according to rules section 9.2 for the Tail Guns’ passing shot at
the Me 109 attacking from 12 O'Clock Level: *:2" — Miss. This
9.1 The B-17 counter remains in Zone 5, but is rotated to point fighter is now removed from play since it failed to score a hit.
toward England.
9.14 Roll 2D twice on Table B-6 to determine successive attack
9.2 There is no fighter cover in this zone. Roll for German positions for the two Me 109s which hit the В-17: “6” - 10:30
fighter waves on Table B-2 (Zone 5 is the target zone): ‘*4’’ - 1 Level; **7" — 12 O'Clock High. Place Me 109 fighter cards in
= “3” = One wave. these positions.
9.3 Roll on Table B-3: “5” and “4” = ''s4'' — Four 109's: 12 9.15 Allocate B-17 defensive fire according to Table M-1:
O’Clock Low, 12 O’Clock Level, 12 O’Clock High, and 9
—Me 109 10:30 Level: Port Cheek and Tail Guns (Tail Guns
O'Clock High. Record ''54'' on the MC. Place the four Me 109
must again wait to fire)
fighter cards on the mapboard in their attack positions.
—Me 109 12 O’Clock High: Top Turret (Nose Guns can’t
9.4 Examine Table M-1 to find which guns can bear on these fire because the Bombardier was seriously wounded during this
fighters. Allocate the fire of the guns by placing the gun markers attack and the Navigator is firing the cheek gun.) Place MG
on the target fighters as follows: markers on the target fighters and mark off ammo on the MC
for the firing guns.
—Me 109 at 12 O’CLock Low: Ball Turret
—Me 109 at 12 O’Clock Level: Nose and Tail Guns (Tail
Guns must wait to attack, see rules section 9.2) 9.16 Roll ID on Table M-1 for each firing gun:
—Me 109 at 12 O’Clock High: Top Turret — Port Cheek: “1” = Miss
—Me 109 at 9 O’Clock High: Port Waist —Top Turret: ''3'' = Miss
Mark off one ammo box for each gun on the MC, except for the
9.17 Roll 1D on Table M-3 for each of the attacking fighters:
Tail Guns which will fire later.
—Me 109 10:30 Level: **5** = Hit
9,5 Roll ID on Table M-1 for each gun firing now: —Me 109 12 High: ‘*3’? = Miss (Remove from play)
—Ball Turret: ‘‘4’’ = Miss
9.18 Resolve the successful attack from the fighter at 10:30
—Nose Guns: ‘‘4’’ = Miss Level:
—Top Turret: **1" — Miss
—Roll 2D on Table B-4: ‘*7’ = 1 hit (Record “1 Н 10:30
— Port Waist: “17” = Miss
Le'' on the MC)
9.6 Roll 1D on Table M-3 for each of the German fighter —Roll 2D on Table B-5: **10" = Superficial Damage (no
attacks: effect)
—Me 109 12 O'Clock Low: **6" = Hit The fighter’s hit has no effect. Cross out the note ‘tl H 10:30
— Ме 109 12 O'Clock Level: **1'" — Miss (Don't remove Le" on the MC.
from play yet—this fighter is the target of the Tail Guns passing
9.19 Mark off one Tail Gun's ammo box on the MC. Roll ID
attack)
according to rules section 9.2 for the Tail Guns passing shot at
—Me 109 12 O'CLock High: *'2" = Miss (Remove from
play) the Me 109 attacking from 10:30 Level: **6" — Hit. Roll IDon
—Me 109 9 O’Clock Нірһ: “5” - Ни Table M-2: *'2" « 1 (Twin guns bonus) — ''3'' — FBOA,
fighter breaks off attack. The fighter is removed from plav. (If
9.7 Roll 2D on Table B-4 once for each of the two Me 109's not hit by the Tail Guns, this fighter would have returned for a
above which hit the B-17 to determine how many shells have hit: second successive attack.) This ends fighter attacks for Turn 6.
—Me 109 12 O'Clock Low: “4” = 2 hits
10.0 TURN 7
—Me 109 9 O'Clock High: "6" = 2 hits
Record on the MC under Hit Notes: 2 hits—12 Lo; 2 hits—9H. 10.1 Miss Cue moves into Zone 4, headed toward England.
9.8 Roll2D on Table B-5 for each of the four hits to determine 10.2 Roll ID on Table G-5 to determine fighter cover: **5" =
which area of the B-17 they hit: Good cover. Record Good cover on the MC in Zone 4 under
“Back”.
—12 Lo: **6" — Nose; ''7" — Bomb Bay
—9 H: ''9'' — Radio Room; ''7T'' = Tail Record on the MC 10.3 Roll 1D on Table B-1 to determine German fighter waves:
under Hit Notes: Nose, BB, RR, Tail. "4" -] = ‘3’? = One wave. Roll on Table B-3 to determine
size and position of the wave: **5" and “2” = “52” = Two
9.9 Roll 2D on Table P-1 to determine damage to the Nose
110s: 6 Level and 9 Low. Record ‘‘52”’ under Zone 4 on the MC,
Compartment: **6" — Bombardier. Roll 1D on Table Bl-4 to
and place two Me 110 fighter cards in the attack positions.
determine wound: “5” — Bombardier seriously wounded.
Record on the MC that the Bombardier is seriously wounded, 10.4 Roll 1D on Table M-4 to determine fighter cover defense:
and mark his counter on the Crew Placement Board with a 64" = 2(1). Since this result means 2 fighters are driven off
seriously wounded marker. Cross out the note ‘‘Nose’’ on the from the initial attack (and 1 fighter from each successive at-
MC to show that the shell hit in the Nose has been resolved. tack), and since the wave consists only of2 fighters, the wave at-
tack is over. Cross out the note ''52'' on the MC.
9.10 Roll 2D on Table P-3 to determine damage to the Bomb
Bay: ‘4’? = Rubber Rafts. Record on the MC under Damage 10.5 Crew movement can now take place with no penaltv,
Notes that the Rubber Rafts are destroyed. Record on the MC according to rules section 14.1. The seriously wounded Bom-
that the dice roll for a landing in water is-6. Cross out the note bardier is moved to the Radio Room. The Radio Operator
“ВВ” оп ће МС. moves to the Nose to operate the cheek guns or Nose Guns.
13

## Page 15

еее psss
Move the crew counters to their new positions on the Crew
Placement Board.
10.6 Miss Cue has safely passed through Zone 4, and now
enters Zone 3.
11-9
11.0 TURN 8 3З0И ММ
11.1 Miss Cue enters Zone 3, pointed toward England.
11.2 Roll 1D on Table G-5 for fighter cover: ‘*6’’ = Good
cover. Record Good cover on the MC in Zone 3 under *“Back””.
11.3 Roll on Table B-1 to determine German fighter waves:
“4” -1 = “3” = One wave. Roll 2D on Table B-3 to determine
the size and position of the wave: *“6°* and **1** = **61°* = 109: AüLNIVS
Vertical Dive (d). Place an Me 109 fighter card directly on top of 13d3A9Lu V1
the B-17, and record ''61'' on the MC under Zone 3.
iт[rэеaн ён и
11.4 According to Note (d), Table B-3, Miss Cue's Good
fighter cover has no effect on the diving attack. Only the Radio
Room and Top Turret Guns may fire defensively. However, the
Radio Operator has moved forward to the Nose, and the Radio
Room Gun is unmanned (the seriously wounded Bombardier
here cannot man the gun). Only the Top Turret may fire, and
according to Note (d), it must roll a6 to hit. Mark off one box of
ammo for the Top Turret and roll 1D: **4** = Miss.
11.5 Roll 1 D on Table M-3 for the German fighter's attack:
*'4" — Miss. Remove the fighter from play. This ends fighter
attacks in Zone 3.
11.6 Miss Cue has safely passed through Zone 3, and into Zone 2.
12.0 TURN 9
12.1 Miss Cue enters Zone 2 (over the English Channel),
pointed toward England.
12.2 Roll 1D on Table G-5 for fighter cover: 2" = Poor
=>
cover. Record Poor cover on the MC in Zone 2 under ''Back''. = =0
Ф
£e
12.3 Roll 1D on Table B-1 to determine German fighter waves:
га
“37? _3 = ‘0’? = None. No German fighters attack.
12.4 Miss Cue has safely passed through Zone 2, and enters
Zone 1.
13.0 TURN 10
13.1 Miss Cue enters Zone 1, and is placed on the 8th Air Force “3342095
Base.
13.2 Roll 2D on Table O-1 to determine the weather conditions
at the base: ''10'' = Good weather. There is no modification to
the landing roll due to weather.
13.3 Roll 2D on Table G-9 to resolve Miss Cue*s landing: *“7*' —
3 (landing gear inoperable) = **4** = Crew and B-17 down
||
safely.
37М0011Н1 10556205314ІН1Л 1І4 02
14.0 POST-MISSION DEBRIEFING
14.1 Roll 1D according to Note (b) of Table Bl-4 to determine
the survival of the seriously wounded Bombardier: ‘‘1’’
Rapid recovery, may fly on next mission.
14.2 Record the Bomb Run percentage, 20%, on the Com-
posite Mission Record. Also, record the Me 110 kill credited to JJHI1O3S 4ILHVVAMHL I AO
the Tail Gunner.
14.3 Since the Bomb Run was On Target and Miss Cue returned
not irreparably damaged, this mission is considered an 8th Air non o n
Force Victory.
Dreg
14

## Page 16

R E R
E
R
T
O
D
I
R
R
U
A
B
F
B
I
ER
S HI
R
-
U
T X
D
S :
D E N G I N
E
ER P I L O T N A V I G
A
W - P
A
B
P
O
'
M B d A e
R
o v e r d N O T E S : C R E
W
BACK O UT
Z2O2NE5FW IA GVHE
O
=
1 0 , 0 TSE:R
[ 0
O U T
O F
C T
(
A O
+
I
1
L Ы мо де T A R G E T
C I T
Y : 1 1
4
m i s s i o
n
B O M B E R
N A
M E :
g w
// S e 0 0 F O Me
k R
GLOEAUANTRD I BDN N -OA1 E TM7E ; AS G:E e F T . ( M A T I 109/6 P A R ( T H M
з 2 x D O N High) I S I S B O I S S
i ( M
G U N T N A E I L R
C O P I L O T S T A R B D . W A I S T L w -
P O W R A T I S T
-
G
п
U B A N
о
L N L E R
_ L
O P E R R A W D A I T
O
O R . i =
ұ
6
e
L
i g h t F l a k O v
e r L a n d )
+ 1
M e 1 0 9 / 1 2
L e v e l / W a v e О L ( o + w 1 ) Î MI DD HCC(HL L M1i+IE E 0eg GA19 hHD /) 12 T A R G E T
L - )
B E
R
.
C
U E
i F A
EC
L E
м
е )
(-1)
T
Y P
E
TD
:
T
=
1 I
N A
SFPIPB D
БН2 1-12
= oă
I ]
= 8 _
M M O
: [um O U A D R O N O R M A T I O N
:
NOO SS II TT II OO NN : - 1 7 U S T R Y M
I
“ Е Н ?
1 Н
9 -
: LO: F E
L D L E L
I L
I I I T
T A R
T A 1414 E N G L
A N D
2 - W E A T H
E R :
5 S S
I
7”
0 : 3 0 ;- Т - К А Н B N Е e B-F s : P Lo e AR KF:A 9ING- 2 0 P O R T W A I S T T E E L E L R L E L L E L 2 0 B A T L U L R R E T T I I I I T I I I I I L I R I A I D I I 1 O 0 L L E ] А T U T RТ O R P E 1 6 T А І Т І Т C І H E Т E K І S T A R B D . 1 0 1 0 P O R T C H E E K т ї г ї т т о N O S E 1 5 G U N S LMOADNID б - FI о IN G O O D E о GR р T A R G E T - S : O N C H
C E L — E T T L I I L Р А Р А Т І Т т їа -(о A R
P“TJHNIeOATTHI EZLS : H V : C L Г Р А (
А T
] Р
r T
I R
T I H T E B
I I G O M
L F B
e T
T
I T
I
O
V E R : R U N
I О C
a
I И
%%
I . 0
T
I T
I
S T т 2
rM I W A 2 4
418W3 42
85
3
1 0003 r
r
2Т3А П [ T
T T T
S T A
R B D .
2 0
м||&е e|2| з p
B A
C K
O U
T oe 2 f
15

## Page 17

НЕНА х
xdi EN
Mr
i
[ШБзееАетс е
BTa A
|4P oe
5
wa
ETNA
|5|0
JE
|Tm
“—BOAT—S1
3
наb я
:
ACINTDY
TTYAPREG ET 4||Е3Ю0% т) е ми- |
Tmz cmm
Queers |-CHRRUAI ELSENYS NA ERSD m3еоаГзoј0 У.еn о ]|Иlа а СEe I аr д ь
[|6|—m1+i 3 <]s— s cue|waMm-ranvaro
[мс[-|З[|tиP1иУо w сa1екoсr uе ss my

## Page 18

PART III NOTES AND CREDITS
DESIGNER’S NOTES
The idea for B-17: QUEEN OF THE SKIES came to me November 1942 to May 1943, you had only about a 30%
about halfway through a reading of Martin Caidin’s Fly- chance to survive 25 missions. By the time you finish
ing Forts (which was out of character for me because I playing B-17 just once, you should have a feel for what it
am much more likely to be reading a book on WW II ar- was like to be a B-17 crew member under attack, with
mor than on airpower). In the middle of a particularly nowhere to duck, hide, or run. You've got to sit there and
action packed account of fighters attacking a B-17 an take what comes, trading bullet for bullet and sweat for
''inspirational flash'' came over me quite unexpectedly, Sweat.
and I realized that a game could be designed to include
My own bias in gaming is toward realism and accuracy,
most of the details of aerial warfare being described. I
and I have always been dismayed when a designer says
knew that most of the WW II air power games available
he sacrificed realism for playability. In B-17 I tried to
were much more strategic in nature. They all dealt with
maintain both maximum realism and playability. I
large numbers of planes, and avoided great detail.
think that if a designer is willing to take the time, it can
I wanted to design a game which would cover the ex- be done, and I hope that B-17 has given you both.
perience of just one plane in great detail. I decided at the
Glen Frank
same time to design the game for solitaire play, with the
option of two player rules included. I felt that there wasa
need for a game you can go out and buy and play without
having to invite, and coordinate the arrival of, up toa
half-dozen friends. With B-17, you can have it either
way.
You can't design a game by reading just one book, so I
immediately went out and bought as many books on the
B-17 as I could find (see the bibliography). By the time I
had finished a few of them, I realized that I would have to
limit the time frame of the game. I chose November 1942
to May 1943 because that was the initial period of B-17
operations in the European Theatre, when the B-17 had
to prove itself against great odds. Fighter cover for
B-17's at that time extended only about 150 miles from
their bases, meaning more danger beyond that range. At
the same time, the Germans had not yet learned the best
techniques for attacking B-17 formations. I felt that if
the game was designed to cover a later part of the war, it
would necessarily be unbalanced. For example, if it ac-
curately covered the period around the Schweinfurt
ball-bearing factory raids, the Germans should come out
ahead. If it covered the last year of the war when the
Allies were consolidating their domination of the skies,
the B-17's should come out ahead. Many B-17 pilots and
crew members I talked to who had been in the later
BIBLIOGRAPHY
period said that they never saw any German fighters,
even in 50 missions, due to our vastly improved fighter Pilot’s Manual for the B-17 Flying Fortress
cover. Bendiner, Elmer The Fall of Fortresses
Birdsall, Steve The B-17 Flying Fortress
I estimate that I spent well over 600 hours in the
Bowers, Peter Fortress in the Sky
research and design of B-17, not including playtesting.
Bowyers, Chaz Guns in the Sky
The system of tables was revised many times, always
Caidin, Martin Flying Forts
with the idea of consolidating as much information as
— —— Black Thursday
possible into one table. I wanted to reduce the number of
Coffey, Thomas Decision Over Schweinfurt
dice rolls necessary, while still maintaining maximum
Copp, Dewitt S. Forged in Fire
realism. I was fortunate in being able to take a tour of an
Freeman, Roger A. B-17 Fortress at War
existing B-17 owned by the Experimental Aircraft
— — Mighty Eighth War Diary
Association of Wisconsin. This was very helpful in thatI
Green, William Famous Bombers of the Second World War
was able to stand or kneel at all of the gun positions and
Jablonski, Edward Airwar, Volume II
determine the angles of fire for the guns in a much better
Peaslee, Budd Heritage of Valor
way than had been possible on my scale model of a B-17.
Scutts, Jerry USAAF Heavy Bomber Units ETO and MTO
However, using 72nd scale models of both the B-17 and
1942-45
the German fighters was extremely important, expecial-
Willmot, H. P. B-17 Flying Fortress
ly in determining what sections of the B-17 could be hit
from each angle of attack, and in measuring the percen-
tage of the B-17’s surface area exposed to each angle of
attack. This allowed me to extrapolate percentages for
the dice rolls on the damage tables.
B-17: QUEEN OF THE SKIES is action packed and bloody
for both the Americans and the Germans. This does not
just provide an exciting game, but reflects the situation
at the time. If you were a B-17 crew member from
17

## Page 19

THE GENERAL
COMPONENTS
11” x 16" Mounted Mapboard
Now that you know how to play the game,
Counter Sheet: 88 Pieces
the next problem is probably who to play it with.
16 Die Cut German Fighter Cards
We can help you with that problem and many
Crew Placement Board others only through your subscription to our bi-
Strategic Movement Board monthly gaming journal, the GENERAL. In
Mission Chart Pad the GENERAL you'll not only read all there is
Charts and Tables Cards to know about this game, but will also learn
Rulebook about our dozens of other exciting simulation
games of skill. Every full color, forty-eight page
2 Six-Sided Dice
issue is jammed full of professional articles on
REPLACEMENT PARTS the strategy and tactics of gaming. Look and see
what the GENERAL offers:
Foracurrent replacement parts list, send one dollar (US) to: The
ADVERTISING: Our Opponents-Wanted
Avalon Hill Game Company, 4517 Harford Road, Baltimore,
Column allows you to advertise for opponents,
Maryland 21214. We will send you our full-catalog describing
discontinued games, or competition of any sort.
the many exciting board and microcomputer games, available Each issue contains hundreds of ads which are
both by mail and in discriminating retail outlets where better read by thousands of readers nationwide. The
games are sold (consult current Parts List for price). fastest way to find an opponent for this game,
whether it be across the street or the Atlantic
RULES QUESTIONS Ocean, isinthe pages of the GENERAL.
Questions on the play of this game will be gladly answered upon GAME DESIGN: Wonder why this game
receipt, if they are accompanied by a stamped, self-addressed was designed the way it was? Read the
envelope. Questions on the actual design or the evolution oft he GENERAL and find out. Our regular DESIGN
game itself cannot be answered. This type of information is ANALYSIS column features explanatory
available only in the pages of our bi-monthly magazine, THE treatises by our designers. Only here can you
find ready-to-play variations, new scenarios,
GENERAL. Sorry, but absolutely no game related questions
and perhaps even more counters for this game.
can be answered by phone.
QUESTIONS ANSWERED: In our Question
Box you'll find the only official source of rules
interpretations and changes for this and our
other games.
PRODUCT REVIEWS: Interested in other
games by The Avalon Hill Game Company?
Check them out in the Reader's Buyers Guide.
The RBG is a game review compiled by our
subscribers at large—the people who play the
games. Realism, complexity, play-balance, and
excitement level are only a few of the categories
rated inthe RBG.
WHAT'S HAPPENING: Like to know what's
going on in the gaming hobby? Each issue
contains an installment of “The Avalon Hill
Game Company’s Philosophy” where we an-
nounce the new games, discuss possible new
titles, and generally keep you informed. In addi-
tion, the /NFILTRATOR'S REPORT keeps
you posted on tournaments, conventions, club
DESIGN CREDITS news, and unusual happenings.
ORIGINAL DESIGN AND DEVELOPMENT: Glen Frank VALUE: In every issue you'll find a coupon
AH DEVELOPMENT: Bruce C. Shelley with Dr. Vincent Frattali worth $/.00 towards the direct mail purchase
GRAPHICS: Dale Sheaffer of all products by The Avalon Hill Game
Company. All of this for just a few dollars. SEE
PLAYTESTERS: Jim Conover, Paul Dyer, Chris Frank, Ruth and
PARTS LIST FOR CURRENT SUBSCRIP-
Bob Gallun, and Scott Puffer; for AH: Dr. Vincent Frattali, Tom
TION COST.
Murphy, Dale Sheaffer, Bob Coggins, and Mick Uhl.
BOX AND MAP ART: Joe DeMarco VARIANTS: Past issues of the GENERAL
PREP DEPT COORDINATOR: Elaine M. Adkins have included all manner of interesting ad-
TYPESETTING: Colonial Composition denda for products by The Avalon Hill Game
PRINTING: Monarch Services Company including additional scenarios for
PRODUCTION: Eastern Box CROSS OF IRON and SQUAD. LEADER.
Don’t miss out on the planned additions for
CRESCENDO. Subscribe to the GENERAL
Original Copyright 1981 On Target Games
today.
Copyright 1983 The Avalon Hill Game Company Since its inception in 1964, the GENERAL
has stood the test of time. Increase your enjoy-
ment of this and other games by The Avalon
Hill Game Company many-fold with a sub-
scription.

## Page 20

B-17 RULES BOOKLET OUTLINE
PART I RULES OF PLAY 10.0 ENGINES OUT
1.0 INTRODUCTION 10.1 ONE ENGINE OUT
10.2 TWO OR THREE ENGINES OUT
2.0 GAME EQUIPMENT 10.3 ONE ENGINE OPERATING
2.1 B-17 MAPBOARD 10.4 NO ENGINES OPERATING
2.2 B-17 STRATEGIC MOVEMENT BOARD
11.0 HEAT OUT/FROSTBITE
2.3 CREW PLACEMENT BOARD
2.4 TABLES AND CHARTS CARDS 12.0 OXYGEN OUT
12.1 OXYGEN OUT EFFECTS
2.5 GERMAN FIGHTER CARDS
12.2 OXYGEN FIRES
2.6 DIE CUT COUNTERSHEET
2.7 MISSION CHART 13.0 OUT OF FORMATION
2.8 COMPOSITE MISSION RECORD 13.1 OUT OF FORMATION EFFECTS
3.0 GAME TABLES IN PLAY 13.2 OUT OF FORMATION OPTIONS
3.1 LOCATING THE TABLES 14.0 REPLACING WOUNDED CREWMEN
3.2 USING THE TABLES 14.1 CREW MOVEMENT
4.0 PLACING THE GAME EOUIPMENT 14.2 CREW REPLACEMENT EFFECTS
4.1 FIGHTER CARDS 15.0 EVASIVE ACTION
4.2 GAME COUNTERS 15.1 EVASIVE ACTION EFFECTS
5.0 SEOUENCE OF PLAY 15.2 EVASIVE ACTION RESTRICTIONS
5.1 PRE-MISSION STEPS 16.0 LANDINGS
5.2 MISSION STEPS 16.1 LANDING LOCATIONS
6.0 COMBAT PROCEDURE 16.2 LANDING IN ENGLAND
6.1 DETERMINING ATTACKERS 16.3 LANDING IN EUROPE
6.2 FIGHTER COVER DEFENSE 16.4 LANDING IN THE SEA
6.3 B-17 DEFENSIVE FIRE 17.0 POST MISSION DEBRIEFING
6.4 GERMAN OFFENSIVE FIRE
18.0 RANDOM EVENTS
6.5 SUCCESSIVE ATTACKS
19.0 FLAK BURST INSIDE PLANE
6.6 2ND AND 3RD WAVES
19.1 COMMENTARY
7.0 HOW TO WIN 19.2 BIP EFFECTS
7.1 MISSION VICTORY CONDITIONS
20.0 GERMAN FIGHTER PILOT STATUS
7.2 CAMPAIGN GAME VICTORY CONDITIONS
7.3 PERFORMANCE RATINGS 21.0 TWO PLAYER RULES
21.1 REVEAL TO THE GERMAN PLAYER
8.0 ABORTING THE MISSION
21.2 KEEP SECRET
9.0 DEFENSIVE FIRE
9.1 NOSE SECTION GUNS PART II SAMPLE MISSION
9.2 TAIL GUNS
9.3 ACE GUNNERS
9.4 MACHINE GUN AMMUNITION PART III NOTES AND CREDITS
9.5 AREA SPRAY FIRE
ERRATA
1. The 5 fire extinguisher counters are placed on the Crew
Placement Board in the box near the starboard waist position.
2. The notes to Table G-10 also apply to Table G-9.
3. Table P-3, Bomb Bay, result ‘‘4’’ = Rubber Rafts = The
Rubber Rafts are unusable, and the roll on Table G-10 when
landing in water is -6.

## Page 21

B-17 TABLES AND CHARTS
O = Orange card; P = Pink card; B = Buff card; BI = Blue
card; G = Green card; M = Map
0-1 WEATHER
0-2 FLAK OVER TARGET
0-3 FLAK TO HIT B-17
0-4 EFFECT OF FLAK HITS
0-5 AREA AFFECTED BY FLAK HITS
0-6 BOMB RUN
0-7 BOMBING ACCURACY
P-1 NOSE
P-2 PILOT COMPARTMENT
P-3 BOMB BAY
P-4 RADIO ROOM
P-5 WAIST
P-6 TAIL SECTION
B-1 NUMBER OF GERMAN FIGHTER WAVES IN
NON-DESIGNATED TARGET ZONE
B-2 NUMBER OF GERMAN FIGHTER WAVES
IN DESIGNATED TARGET ZONE
B-3 ATTACKING FIGHTER WAVES
B-4 SHELL HITS BY AREA
B-5 AREA DAMAGE TABLES
B-6 SUCCESSIVE ATTACKS
B-7 RANDOM EVENTS
BL-1 WINGS
BL-2 INSTRUMENTS
BL-3 HAND HELD EXTINGUISHERS
BL-4 WOUNDS
BL-5 FROSTBITE
G-1,2,3 MISSION TARGETS
G-4 B-17 FORMATION POSITION
G-5 FIGHTER COVER
G-6 CONTROLLED BAILOUT
G-7 BAILOUT FROM UNCONTROLLED PLANE
G-8 BAILOUT OVER WATER
G-9 LANDING ON LAND
G-10 LANDING IN WATER
G-11 FLIGHT LOG GAZETTEER
M-1 B-17 DEFENSIVE FIRE
M-2 HIT DAMAGE AGAINST GERMAN FIGHTER
M-3 GERMAN OFFENSIVE FIRE
M-4 FIGHTER COVER DEFENSE
M-5 B-17 AREA SPRAY FIRE
M-6 FIGHTER PILOT STATUS
Y-1985 6/84 8510001
20

## Page 22

H
E
L І
F П
R І
E Т
L Т
E Т
K Т
E Т
E Т
] H Т
I T I Т
E I T
E T I I Т Т Р
E I L Т Е
E T I Т
E I I Т Н
I L
E I I Т Р
Н Н І E E I T I T Т Т Е
ү й Ш Е Ш Е Е Г E E E T I I T L L Д А О П І І К
ж Ш E J I ]
| Е E II I Е
H J я н % н н U 3 1 H 9 1
4
: 8 3 A 0 2 1 0 0 [ з | Ш E E
E E L
E
E
) L L I I
I
I I I I T L I
В Е
Р Н Е
Р Ј Ј Ј Н
Е
Т Е
Е Њ Е
500 E 0 T 1 £ 5 M8 8 / t
R Е Ч
E Ј
V F
А
u C E Е
Е
Ј Ј
Е
НР А Ј
1
=
Р
v
i
s
Е
Т
N = = E s u
a
O I S
S I I
S H 3 I 4 I G O W
S O
м п 9 I S O N X 3
3 H
1
9
8 0 4 ü 8 H V
3
I
3 S 8 9
Л И Г И " 7 7И o y y T i v 8 l
a u u n i
1 9 0 9 I S
I V M i s w m '
W L
Е Ј )
N : 5
: H 3 H 1 V 3 M - 1 3 9 4 V L - Q N V 1 9 N 3 S N I G N Y T м O W 1 9 W 5 Y 1 в 0 0 i — 0 1 0 2 — 0 2 o z ‎ £ 2 : S I L O N
У ‘
H
; L
I
= ی
.
5 =
O
d
S
I =
8 I L
£ L -
(
W
7
O 8
7 1 : 3 3 9 d 8 A V L 1 N O
H
H
O
' G
J
N
W
O
A Ġ S П н ә н a - n a O w О м ( о л 1 + )
Z
L / 6
(
0
O
L
A E M / 1 9 A 9 7 ( p u e
1
7
8 4
Х
0
ы ~ ;
~ = ; = ~ ;
O l
Q V H
0 1 9 5 3 4 0
ج
ڪ
T I V
H
B
I N N A I
ی о 1 4 0
1 4
9 м м
—
' 0 B
I
H —
S
W
I I W S M
T I V L
H I N N A I
H 3 : 3 H A W V O N S N # O — ^ I S S I S
w
H I
a
I W
g ) 8
1 A 3 L 9 I 8 S V 1 / 1 - 8 N N O I L L I
:
S
N
O
O
d
L L V W
O a v n t + ) 8 W
Z L / 6 0 ( U L Ġ I H
n a O w C і ] 1 і ә + й 9 )
( / ц 6 е і 0 н :
C I 1 1 4 0 0 . N O
L
I
+ ? L ) W V I W H O 4 6 ә 0 х 2
7
)
1 4 0 0 0 = 0 O
1
: S J A H V 3 M 1 H 9 1 4 і м ? S T ;
~ ;
1 1 0 Х о у в M 3 H 9 ' S I L O N u 3 i q u v a W o g
ے ت ‎
H O L V I I A V N 1 0 1 1 8 1 0 1 1 4 0 — 2 — H 3 3 N I D N A Z 1 - 8 3 9 V W V O * S 3 1 0 N

## Page 23

W424138 3
8510003
541.
PORT
WAIST
=
ас
©
e
һы
cc
RADISOg t.
z
e |OTPU RERREATT OR
o
=
=
ENGMSgsIttN..E ER
ыы
=
N co
PILLiOeTu t.
e
a.
= TБ.е
29
e
аә
e
m
=
'
fa
|GBAA RTDOIRE R
CAINTDY
TTYAPREG ET
ПЕС –| ~| > || |е |~ ] |е е| а| ее ааа

## Page 24

B-17 tess GOUNTERSHEET |
пат |о тат н, 1u | mor | pae |a n
y = . | RADIO
| ысын ы ا‎ i el ]
PORT | STRBD. | TAL | мозе | STREP. | PORT | ТОР | RADIO |
WAIST | WAIST | Ы) МЕ | CHEEK | CHEEK | TURRET| ROOM
GUNNER | GUNNER MG MG MG's MG
|
BALL | PORT | STRBD. | tay | ENGINE | ENGINE | ENGINE | TAEL |
ТОПАЕТ| "НТ | ШЕТ! wes | ne | мо | HE | ғ
5 ila __| BABIAILLOOUUTT| |
GAS GAS GAS
OIL OIL | OXYGEN | OXYGEN
LEAK | LEAK | FIRE FIRE E TEE M xX
4 E EXTIN- $ ЕХТІН- EXTIN- EXTIN- EXTIN- | EXTIN- LIGHT
GUISHER GUISHER | GUISHER GUISHER GUISHER GuisHen | WOUND |
і |
|
LIGHT LIGHT LIGHT ^4 LIGHT LIGHT | SERIOUS | SERIOUS | SERIOUS |
WOUND | WOUND | WOUND | WOUND | WOUND | WOUND | WOUND ; WOUND
L oki ah да ل‎ 4
FIGHTER | FIGHTER | FIGHTER \ FIGHTER | FIGHTER
TINUES | TINUES | TINUES | TINUES | TINUES
FIGHTER
BREAKS
OFF -2
8510031/32

## Page 25

B-17 Airplane Cards ©1983 * The Avalon Hill Game Company * Printed in USA 8510004
FW190
|
|
т
|nv cPt a lI S
m
FW190
ME109
fi

## Page 26

n> A

## Page 27

995592206
Ш (ieuondo)
уо
UJAP
Sn1V
n( ez - 0 3 1 S E M SAAB)
e
x o e+ U n 1S
yp p ш у JO LOTld
ц$ е 14} ( s
u n
ј и п
в и JAQLUNU
S I Q E L
'(L-IN
з у епоэ л а
э
s j a 1 ipnuje
jrej
ә л-е | '
з 5 а
$ $
A
1
Y
9
)
3 94} 9
H
-
3
I
1
N
H914
НМ13 LZ I-ЗУ5 9HW1ЙМ НІІ/9Н9 01З94ЗУ о н ) а и о
а у р 10у 4 9 2 3и ц п
$ ә л
ш о д
у
1Т1903Н4 43
1 9 3 4 8 1 4 ) p a B
e
uрrиeеp
: s e j o(N
e u i m , s u n B j e g ) p u e
d o
ә } р * j o 1
1 d o o x o i s u i e B 3 e 4
"061
( 0 ү ү
ә В е шә ер р 5 0 4 1 5 $
ш0е\В4е
0 6 1
'a1UuBu/JAmĠ n0Jj4yEG Uj WMeE wPo u
3HHtr3S3-I1NAц1AjW"aj0IоH30 uәo4Pвo9л32g а е13 м
1 Ш 0 1
4
N
40HHY470
1
1
1
4
1
I
O
I300
Н -
13V
9 0
I
A400 0 4I
9
L
O09d40
I
I9 9
9
мS о
4
Oт
5
d
1 ‘ ш
з A j s
1
o u л s
о 0
e
9 0 0 "
е 5 у 2 J "
J1B:
a а
USJJаS
4 з
I
1
5
!
и
4 U
I 6
I
п
SOOJB
j
YO
1
н
ц 4
1 Y
у
A
q
з
9AGQ
p
)
и
1
а e B s
j 1 a
yjƏu0usa‘ 11
e
L
е
U-)L
a y р
!
o
u
yy
8
u
aeoy0
e
eUJ
1
л
uI
u
U
e
)
о
}
q
qNs
j
B
n
Pye anN
u
N
B ш u
uIe
i
niUUu
s
a i
Jiye
y
e
g n
Jnd*d
u
u s o eesyeu d "а;п
(e)
‘ a 4 A e 1 d s B u i s n
1о о1aјн9dр 1 4s181n 0i9v i
s y o e y e A j j e w u o u
s
8 1 2 * * ' 0 6 1 9 1 c s
p a
u 4
o A q
r
A s j
9
e e n u B
4
o w e
a
а ц и р
е х о 1 }
y
п э
у й
ш а
)
в в
ш
п ш ә
ә
ш
ц
е
е
г
3JNE4-AV1WI‘э1‘ИW201э41 493SМр9и0ЗH 1 1 94о N-4 а 3 838 щ194
M
4
O
4
V
0
L I
а
'
Z
V
L
U
л
B
ә
I
т
H
“'61u/9B£4I 2H7 :sa
B S
S 9 J 1I O
A
o
E э
0N Y
M
-
ш J
A
и
1US35ш/
E
9,J
и
1Jоә 1!U9-лI
е
0}"awрS0Н1 3уU9
з
цyр UPUаo 1M8)
э
аб BYл. е1
р
; о о4 шд а л
3AV2S 81-3y 1-WHH38 Vd S ( i e u o n d o )
9 i 4 a d
a j p
ә и о о н 111903 Аз1зO|
9 ' 6 ' v - - - 6 0 1
Н3 9ндшW 4 3еэе £
s a j y
3
b l y
4шег8 иц1 ле4о/ и( 9)
a A a
(
e
:
d
e
4
S
d
9
s
1 0 N
'21ү0sг1Еuэ :rп1eл Bәeд *ш0э $:миў0аіз1 е ц е j o u 10
" в у з е ц е
А з
у (4
а е
| u-:
џ
/‘|5
ш
uз'меа|2|
и
np 2 иnа1по-'
п
a6џор6н"џ-џ:з89и x
в
-0 9 а кршпy2 8‘ ловие y о шшв‘
" W u e
лша¢иае л е! ш лоа
“G---601 “G-
9
-
'
-
8
6
'
0
w
1
- --OLL
51
у
цp9uоaouн po3oa a }1r 4pa u '06 8 '6'9"“-00%-16--11—6 -0011 1 “0 9‘‘OO-LG—LL6 01 601 ‘06 6 4 - - 0 1 ‘OLL ‘OGL 06
%'E-
‘‘ “ 0 6 1
-
OO
-
LG
O
LL
L L
6 '%'Е-—-011 а
п з
а л а ц у и U834J1A4 Q
'SIJO1
" и ц
B
A I S
е
з
л
1 - И Z 1
- 8
3 A I S N
H3 3 I3 0
2 2 1 8 1 4
у о
е ц у 1 0 4 4
2 1 - 8 5 , 9 0 Ч И
М
1pJ8jO4e 1t34 d o y y o u n g P i L O G A L
I9S9 4 9
1Р15РІ0Р4М1 e ғ g 1 64P5I9 L2O4G9I LIS d Ja o a ni SPAPBMOG IBIS yaan, J S I E M P A B O G I B I S a 8 d o s a u n , з е м м о д д за о л ап s u n g i e l ““sji0ұue6-nl1-g 6 01
‘ s a l o n ( 2 O 6 1
=
M d ‘OGL
0 1 1 =
3 “ 0 1 1 р и е 6 0 1 =
3
"801 е
м
ј
е
$1
9 J O J104 e ‘193443 LI
з л е и р
о ш А џ е
ј 0
з 5 о ј р л е в а н ( 9 ( 2 и џ г о џ
з е џ и п у
р е џ р г
лч ои5)м ( 5 0 з р|р е 01
п е
‘ a B e w e
p ә ш ш л
ә ј ә р о]
г -
и 2 1 9 8 1 0) 08)

## Page 28

B-5 AREA DAMAGE TABLES
B-17 compartment sections hit from each attack area. Roll 2D for each shell hit, and then go to appropriate Tables P-1 through P-6 and B1-1,2 to deter-
mine specific damage for each hit.
ATTACK FROM: 12 / 1:30 / 10:30
HIGH
5 Radio Room
7 Pilot Compt.
i
11 Bomb Bay
|
ATTACK FROM: 3 /9
HIGH
LEVEL LOW
6 Wing-Attacking
al Side
i
9 Radio Room
11 Superficial
Damage =
ATTACK FROM: 6 O'CLOCK
HIGH LEVEL |LO|W
ROLL AREA HIT ROLL AREA HIT ROLL AREA HIT
2-3 Superficial 2-3 Superficial 2 Nose
Damage
uu"
о 6 Port Wing
TÄ: жар: 8 Starboard Wing
кеттіа н
jalking
Fuselage Fuselage (a)
EN ВЕНЕ
VERTICAL VERTICAL CLIMB
ROLL AREA HIT ROLL AREA HIT
2-3 Superficial 2-3 Superficial
Damage
Damage
5 Radio Room
—9À
7 а! Hits/
кш
Fuselage (a)
P$ hotc omp
Fuselage (a)
ти
11 Waist
ENE
Notes: A ‘‘walking hits’’ result negates all other shell hits by this fighter for this attack, and does the following damage:
a) 1 shell hit in each of the following sections—Nose, Pilot Compartment, Bomb Bay, Radio Room, Waist and Tail.
b) 2 shell hits on each Wing.
с) 1 shell hit in each of the following sections: Nose, Wing (attacking side), Waist, and Tail.

## Page 29

NAVIGATOR
PILOT _
ry)
та!
PILO PILOT
COMPARTMENT COMPARTMENT
үт)
BOMB BAY
RADIO ROOM
“RADIO OPERATOR
BALL GUNNER
WAIST PORT WAIST GUNNER _i i — S TARBOARD WAIST GUNNER — "^57
је
س ا
eu Ed ee
Н Fen TA онин
H- PLACEMENT BOARD
р £ 3 The Avalon Hill Game Com;
.Y-1990 8/84 oid 8510006

## Page 30

B-1 NUMBER OF GERMAN FIGHTER WAVES IN NON-DESIGNATED
TARGET ZONE
Roll 1D.
ROLL WAVES
1-2 None B-4 SHELL HITS BY AREA (a)
3-5 T Roll 2D per successful attacking fighter (b).
6 2*
12/ 1:30 VERTICAL VERTICAL
*Go to Table B-3 ROLL 10:30 3/9 6 DIVE CLIMB
3 4 6 3 4
B-2 NUMBER OF GERMAN FIGHTER WAVES IN DESIGNATED 2 3 5 2 4
2 3 4 2 3
TARGET ZONE
Roll 1D (a). 2 3 3 1 2
1 2 2 1 2
ROLL WAVES 1 1 2 1 1
1 2 2 1 2
0-3 1 (b) 2 3 3 1 2
4,5 2(b) 2 3 à 2 3
6 3 (b) 2 3 5 2 4
a 5 7 4 5
Notes: a) Poor or Bad weather over the target zone (from Table 0-1) sub-
tracts 1 from this roll. Notes: a) If the attacking fighter is a FW 190, multiply the number of shell hits
b) Go to Table B-3. by 1' (rounding down). If the fighter was a Me 110, add 1 to the number of
shell hits.
b) After determining the number of shell hits the B-17 takes, go to Table B-5
to find out where the shells hit.
B-3 ATTACKING FIGHTER WAVES
Roll 2D for each separate wave from B-1 or B-2.
ROLL FIGHTER TYPES (a)—AREA OF ATTACK
B-6 SUCCESSIVE ATTACKS
11 109 6 High Roll 2D for each fighter.
12 Two 109’s: 1:30 High and 9 Level
13 Three 190's: 12 High, 1:30 High, 3 High ROLL SUCCESSIVE ATTACK AREA
1% Four 109's: 12 High, 10:30 High, 1:30H igh, an12dL ev el
15 Five 190's: 12 High, 10:30 Level, 9 Level, 6 High, and Vertical 2 6 High
Dive (b) 3 6 Level
16 NO ATTACKERS (c) 4 S Level
21 One 190: Vertical Dive (а) 5 12 Level
Two 110's: 12 Low and 10:30 Low 6 10:30 Level
23 Three 190's: 12 High, 3 Level, and 3 High 7 12 High
24 Four 109's: 12 Hig3hH i,gh , 9 Hiagndh 9 L,eve l 8 1:30 Level
25 Five 190's: 12 High, 1:30 High, 3 High, 6 High, and 9 High 9 12 Level
26 NO ATTACKERS (c) 10 3 Level
31 110: Vertical Climb (e) 11 9 High
32 Two 190's: 10:30 High and 3 Level 3 High
33 Three 109's: 12 Level, 12 High, and 1:30 Level
34 190: 10:30 High; 110: Vertical Climb (e)
35 Two 190's: 12 Level and 1:30 Low
36 NO ATTACKERS (c)
41 109: 12 High
42 Two 109's: 12 Level and 1:30 High B-7 RANDOM EVENTS TABLE
43 190 12 High; Two 109's: 1:30 Level and 3 Level Roll 2D.
44 Two 190's: 12 High and 12 Low; 109: 1:30 Level; 1106 L:o w
45 0:30 Level and 12 Level; 110: 10:30 Low ROLL EVENT
46 NO ATTACKERS (c)
51 190: 10:30 High Engine failure.
52 Two 110's: 6 Level and 8 Low Formation casualties. Roll 1D: 1-3 = You are now the lead
53 Three 110's: 12 Low, 10:30 Level, and 6 Low bomber; 4-6 = Now tail bomber.
54 Four 109's: 12 Low, 12 Level, 12 High. an9d Hig h Loose formation. Roll to determine enemy fighter waves in zone
55 190: 12 Low; Three 109's: 12 Level, 12 High, and 10:30 Level on Table B-1 or B-2 is +1.
56 NO ATTACKERS (c) Aggressive ‘‘Little Friends’’. Roll for fighter cover defense on
61 109: Vertical Dive (d) Table M-4 is +1 for the remainder of the mission.
62 109: 3 Low; 110: 1:30 Low Tight formation. Rollt o determine enemy fighter waves in zone
63 Three 190's: 10:30 High, 12 High, and 1:30 High on Table B-1 or B-2is —1.
64 Four 190's: 12L ev1e:30lL e,vel , 3 Loanwd 9, Hi gh
Rabbit's foot. You may re-roll any one die or dice roll.
65 Five 109's: 12 Level, 3 High, 1:30 High, 6 High, and Vertical Tight formation. See result #6 above.
Dive (b)
Bad Luftwaffe communications.
RANDOM EVENTS: See rules section Random Events Extreme cold. Roll 1D for each gun position: 1-5 = No effect;
6 = Gun jammed.
Notes: a) 109 = Me 109, 110 = Me 110, and 190 = FW 190. Ace for a day. Roll 1D: 1,2= Engineer; 3,4 = Ball Gunner;
b) B-17 cannot fire at this fighter, nor may it be driven off by 5-6 = Tail Gunner. This gunner +1 to hit on Table M-1 for
fighter cover. remainder of the mission.
c) Fighters are driven off by other B-17’s. If out of formation, roll 12 Mid-air accident.
d) Only the Top Turret or Radio Room guns may fire at this fighter Notes: See rules section Random Events for notes to the above results.
(both must roll a 6 to hit), and this fighter may not be driven off by
fighter cover.
e) Only the Ball Turret may fire at this fighter (it must roll a 3-6 to
hit), and this fighter may be driven off by fighter cover.
8510006

## Page 31

o
i
P у
о а
u
e d u
y
Q N И Т
Т Е N I
а W
н
J A O
W
r e s
*
K
9000158
L u
a
5
L
L - 81 9 3 1 1
9
1
и о ј е
лШуН N
S
2
ц
і
0э
1 3 % 2 8 6 1
1
4
3
%
o
t
N
SS
S
N
e т£a5nn o
e
f
f s-u-ya g-ang-<qsoy
a
e
A
H
V
џ N
е I
п ш J
a о л
r р а
y н
о
w т O
G N V
T
g 3 2 1 0
4
a s e g N
O
N
A
2124904
SN1
=
7
2
Q
u

## Page 32

B1-1 WINGS B1-3 HAND HELD EXTINGUISHERS
Roll 2D per shell hit. Roll 2D per attempt to extinguish fire.
ROLL AREA HIT EFFEGT ROLL EFFECT
2-3 Wing Root 1 wing root hit (a) l-4 Fire out -
4 Wing Flap Roll 1D: 1-3 = Flap inoperable (b); 4-6 = 5,8 Fire conttiry angauin (e3t sry, lim it)
No effect. 5 |
5 Aileron Roll 1D: 1-3 = Aileron inoperable (b); 4-6 = There are 5 portable fire extinguishers in the B-17, represented by
No effect. individual counters placed on the Crew Placement Chart. Each may be
6-8 Superficial No effect. sprayed once and then it's empty. A crewman may not operate a gun
Damage RS during an attack in which he is fighting a fire. A crewman may
9 Engines Roll 1D: If port wing—1-3 = #1 engine; 4-6 = #2 immediately attempt 3 times to put out af ire (i.e., use up 3 extinguishers).
engine. If starboard wing—1-3 = #3 engine; 4-6 If the fire is not out after the 3rd try, the crew must immediately bailout,
= #4 engine. Roll 1D again: 1,2 = Superficial Table G-6. Used extinguishers are removed from play.
Damage; 3,4 = Engine out (c); 5 = Runaway
engine( d); 6 = Oil tank hit. (e)
10 Fuel Tank Roll 1D: 1-3 Outboard tank; 4-6 Inboard tank. Roll
1D again: 1,2 = Fire (1); 3,4 = Leakage (g); 5,6
= Self-seal, no effect.
11 Wing Root See effect for roll of 2 or 3 above.
12 Landing Gear Roll 1D: 1-3 — Brake out (h); 4-6 = Landing gear
inoperable (i).
Notes: a) When a wing root has accumulated 5 hits over the course of a
mission, the wing rips off and the crew must immediately bailout accord-
ing to Table G-7.
b) If both the port and starboard wing flaps or ailerons are inoperable, the
landing roll on Table G-9 or G-10 is -1.
с) Roll 1D: 1-5 = Prop feathered; 6 = Prop not feathered, B-17 must
spend 2 turns per zone due to wind drag, and is out of formation (See
rules sections Engines Out and Out of Formation.)
d) Roll 1 D: 1-5 = Prop feathered and engine out; 6 = Prop not feathered, B1-4 WOUNDS
engine out of control—crew must immediately bailout according to Table Roll 1D per affected crew member.
G-6.
e) Roll 1D: 1-2 = Engine fire (Each engine has 2 extinguisher charges ROLL EFFECT
per mission. Roll 1D: 1-4 = Fire out; 5,6 = Fire continues—try again. If
second try fails, crew must immediately bailout according to Table
1-3 Light Wound: Crewman may continue duties unimpaired. (a)
G-6.); 3-4 = Leakage (Roll 1D: 1,2 = Engine must be shut off after 1
4,5 Serious Wound: Crewman may not continue duties, may not
more zone of travel; 3,4 = Shut off engine after 2 more zones; 5,6 =
bailout. (b)
Shut off engine after 3 more zones.); 5-6 = Self-seal, no effect. 6 KIA: Crewman killed in action.
1) Roll 1D: 1-5 = Fire continues, bailout, Table G-6; 6 = Explosion, bailout,
Table G-7.
Notes: a) A 2nd light wound results in: Gunners may only hit fighters with
g) Roll 1D; (B-17 may travel the following number of zones, then bailout, à roll of 6; Bombardier loses his 11-25th mission bonus and the Bomb Run
Table G-6, or crash land, Table G-9 or G-10.) 1,2 = 4 zones; 3,4 = 5 roll on Table 0-6 is -1; Pilot and Co-Pilot lose their 11-25th mission bonus
zones; 5,6 = 6 zones. If this is the second separate tank hit, B-17 may go when landing (but if either hasn't taken 2 light wounds he may land the
o m n o l r y e 2 z o m n o e r s e . zones. If this is the third separate tank hit, B-17 may only go 1 plane using his bonus); Bailout for this crewman on Table G-6 is -1. 3 light
wounds = a serious wound. 4 light wounds = KIA. Light wound + serious
h) Landing roll on Table G-9 -1.
wound = KIA.
T i) a b If l e t he 6 -9 l an i d s i - n 3 g . gear on either or both sides is inoperable, landing roll on b) After landing roll 1D for each serious wounded crewman for survival: 1
= Rapid recovery, may fly on next mission; 2-5 = Recovery, but may not
B1-2 INSTRUMENTS fly any more missions; 6 = Wounds fatal, crewman dies.
Roll 2D per shell hit on instruments.
ROLL AREA HIT ` EFFECT
2 панне Bomb Run roll оп Table 0-6 -2 (a).
jot
3 Landing Gear Landing roll on Table G-9 -3.
4 Intercom Mission may be aborted (b).
System Out B
5 Oxygen System Drop out of formation to 10,000 ft in next
zone (c).
6 Flaps Landing roll onT able 6-9 ог 6-10 -1 (9).
7 Ailerons Landing roll on Table G-9 or G-10 -1 (d).
8 Elevators - Landing roll on Table G-9 or G-10 -1 (d).
9 Rudder Landing roll on Table G-9 or G-10 -1 (d).
10 Propeller Crew must immediately bailout Table G-6 in the
Feathering case of a subsequent runaway engine result
from Table B1-1.
11 Engine Fire Engine fire extinguishers out. Crew must
Extinguishers immediately bailout Table G-6 if engine fire
occurs. B1-5 FROSTBITE
12 oe Crew must immediately bailout Table G-6. Roll 1D per affected crewman.
Notes: a) If intercom system also out, Bomb Run is automatically off Li Е С
target.
b) See rules section Aborting Missions. Also, all gunners now must roll a 6 4 1 - - 6 3 N Fr o o s f t r b o i s t t e b . i te ( a) t his turn.
to hit attacking fighters, except Tail gunners which will hit on 5 or 6.
c) See rules sections Oxygen Out and Out of Formation.
d) Disregard the landing roll modifications for lost controls of the flaps, Notes: a) See rules section Heat Out/Frostbite.
ailerons, and elevators, if both the port and starboard parts of these b) After landing, roll 1D for each frostbitten crewman separately: 1-3 =
Systems are already inoperable. If the rudder is already inoperable, ignore crewman may not fly any more missions; 4-6 = crewman recovers, may
the landing roll modification for loss of the rudder's controls. fly next mission.
8510006

## Page 33

MISSION TARGETS
G-1 MISSIONS 1-5 G-2 MISSIONS 6-10
Roll 1D.
ROLL TARGET ROLL TARGET TYPE
1, St. Omer 1 Airfield
22 Cherbourg
5
à E
5 Abbeville
5 Lille
G-3 MISSIONS 11-25
Roll 2D.
ROLL TARGET TYPE ROLL TARGET
11 St. Omer Airfield 41 Lorient*
12-2 u Airfield 42 St. Nazaire
13 Amiens Rail Yard 43 St. Nazaire
1^ Meaulte Aircraft A St. Nazaire
15. Abbeville Airfield 45 Wilhelmshaven*
16 Lille Industry 46 Willhelmshaven* U Boats
21 Rotterdam Ship Yard 51 Emden Industry
22 Industry 52 Emden қ Industry
23 Rouen Rail Yard 53 Vegesack* U Boats
24 Paris Industry 54 U Boats
25 Paris : Industry 55 Aircraft
26 Romilly-S.-S. Aircraft 56 Aircraft
31 Romilly-S.-S. Aircraft 61 Rail Yard
32 Rennes Rail Yard 62 Rail Yard
33 Rennes Rail Yard 63 La Rochelle* U Boats
34 Brest U Boats 64 La Rochelle* U Boats
35 Brest = 65 Kiel* U Boats
.36 Lorient* 66 Kiel* U Boats
*Add 1 to die roll for flak occurence over target zone, Table 0-1.
G-4 B-17 FORMATION POSITION G-7 BAILOUT FROM UNCONTROLLED PLANE
Roll 1D.
FORMATION POSITION SQUADRON POSITION
(Missions 6-25 oniv) ROLL EFFECT
Roll 2D. Roll 1D.
1-5 No bailout, goes down with plane.
ROLL POSITION ROLL SQUADRON 6 Bailout OK.
2 Lead Bomber 1.2 High Notes: a) Roll for each crewman separately.
3-1 Middle 3.4 Middle b) Seriously wounded crewmen may not bailout.
12 Tail Bomber 5,5 Low c) If bailout is over Germany or the Netherlands, crewman is automatically
captured.
d) If bailout is over France or Belgium, for each crewman who lands OK
гой 10: 1-5 = Captured; 6 - returned to England by the Underground in time
G-5 FIGHTER COVER*
for next mission.
Roll 1D. e) If crewmen bailout over water, roll 1D also on Table G-8.
d) A roll of 6 is always ‘‘Bailout OK'’, even if the light wounds modifier is
ROLL COVER in effect.
12 Poor G-8 BAILOUT OVER WATER
3,4 Fair
Roll 1D.
5.6 Good
ROLL EFFECT
*Missions 1-5 are automatically GOOD fighter cover.
1-4
Dies of drowning, exposure, etc.
5,6
G-6 CONTROLLED BAILOUT
Notes: Roll 1D for each crewman separately.
Roll 1D.
b) If the radio was not operating, all crewmen bailing out over water die.
ROLL EFFECT
G-9 LANDING ON LAND
1 Roll 1D: 1-5 Bailout OK; 6 = Crewman killed in accident. Roll 2D.
2-6 Bailout OK.
ROLL EFFECT
-3 Crew KIA and B-17 wrecked.
-2 Crew rolis for wounds, Table B1-4, die roll +1; B-17 wrecked.
-1 Crew rolls for wounds, Table B1-4; B-17 wrecked.
0 Crew safe and B-17 irrepairably damaged.
1 Crew safe and B-17 repairable by next mission.
2-2 Crew and B-17 safe.
8510006

## Page 34

G-10 LANDING IN WATER
Roll 2D.
ROLL EFFECT
2-3 Crew lost
4-12 Crew rescued
Notes: a) A roll of 12 is always ''crew safe'' regardless of negative
modifiers in effect.
b) If Pilot and/or Co-Pilot are on 11-25th mission, die roll is +1.
€) If landing in Germany or Netherlands, entire crew is captured.
d) If landing in France or Belgium, for each surviving crewman roll 1D:
1-5 = Captured; 6=rescued by Underground and returned to England in
time for next mission. (Seriously wounded crewmen are automatically
captured.)
e) If roll is 0 or less and bombs are still aboard, roll 1D: 1-z5N o effect;
6 = Explosion, B-17 and all remaining crewmen destroyed.
f) If the Pilot and Co-Pilot are dead or seriously wounded and another
crewman is attempting to land the B-17, landing roll is – 11.
g) If landing in water with the radio out, landing roll is —6, if out of for-
mation.
h) If landing with only 1 engine operating, landing roll is —3.
i) If landing with no engines operating, landing roll is —7 (if landing in
water, – 4).
j) If landing on land not in England, landing roll is —3.
G-11 FLIGHT LOG GAZETTEER
TARGET CITY ZONE ZONE ZONE ZONE ZONE ZONE ZONE
2 3 4 5 6 7 8
Abbeville -2/W 41/F
Amiens -2/W 0/F
Antwerp -2/W -1/B 0/В
Bremen -2/W -1/W -1/W -1/W -1/W 0/G
Brest -3/W -2/W -1/W -1/W *l/F
Cherbourg |. -2/W 0/W-F
Emden -2/W -1/W -1/W -1/W -1/W 0/G
Hamm -2/W -1/W -1/W 0/N 0/N 0/6
Kiel -2/W -1/W -1/W -1/W -1/W -1/W 0/6
La Rochelle -2/W -1/W OF OF OF OF OF
Lille -2/W O/F
Lorient -2/W -1/W -1/W 0/F OF
Meaulte -2/W O/F
Paris -2/W МЕ OF OF
Rennes -2/W -1/W Q/F 0/F
Romilly-sur-Seine -2/W O/F 0/F O/F
Rotterdam -2/W -1/W 0/W-N
Rouen -2/W -1/W Q/F OF
St. Omer 0/W-F
St. Nazaire -2/W -YW Е Е +1/Е|
Vegesack -2/W -1/W -1/W -1/W -1/W 0/6
Wilhelmshaven -2/W -1/W -1/W -1/W -1/W 0/G
Notes: a) The number to the left of the slash is the modification, if any, to
the roll on Table B-1 when determining the number of German fighter
waves in the zone.
b) The letter(s) to the right of the slash is a code identifying whether the
zone is over water or a particular nation. W = Water; B = Belgium;
F = France; N= Netherlands; G= Germany. This information comes into play
when a B-17 is forced down in a zone or the crew must bailout. Where a
zone shows two code letters, the player has a choice of where to come
down if the B-17 is under control.
c) Rescued crewmen who come down into water in Zones 6 or 7 are cap-
tured. Those coming down in Zones 2-5 are returned to England.

## Page 35

0-1 WEATHER 0-5 AREA AFFECTED BY FLAK HITS
Roll 2D. (c)
Roll 2D per shell hit from Table 0-4.
WEATHER OVER WEATHER OVER ROLL AREA AFFECTED
ROLL TARGET ZONE BASE
2 Bomb Bay (P-3)
2 Bad(a) Вай (а) 3 Port Wing (B1-1)
3 Poor (b) Poor (b) 4 Radio Room (P-
4-10 Good Е Good 5 Tail (P-6)
11 Poor (b) Poor (b) 6 Port Wing (B1-4)
12 Вай (а) | Bad (а) 7 Тай (Р-6)
8 Starboard Wing (B1-4)
Notes: a) Bad Weather causes —2 on Bomb Run roll on Table 0-6 and —2 9 Waist (P-5)
on Landing roll on Tables G-9 or G-10. 19 - maU x
b) Poor Weather causes —1 on Bomb Run roll on Table 0-6 and —1 on 11 Starboard Wing (B1-4)
Landing roll on Tables G-9 or G-10. 12 Pilot Compartment
c) Both Poor and Bad Weather cause — 1 on Table B-2 Number of German
Fighter Waves in Designated Target Zone, – 1 on Table 0-2 Fiak Over Notes: After finding the area affected by each flak shell hit, go to the table
Target, and —1 on Table M-4 Fighter Cover Defense. for that area to determine the damage done there.
0-2 FLAK OVER TARGET
Roll 1D.
ROLL AMOUNT OF FLAK*
1
No Flak
2 цот Flak
3 Light Flak
о
5
Medium Flak
.8 Heavy Flak
“After determining amount of flak, go to Table 0-3 Fiak to Hit B-17 to see if
the B-17 is hit. 0-6 BOMB RUN
Roll 1D.
0-3 FLAK TO HIT B-17
ROLL EFFECT
Roll 2D three times under the appropriate column.
1 Off Target
ROLL HEAVY MEDIUM LIGHT 2 off Target
ad | ‹ 3 On Target
PITS eee kit 4 On Target
3 Hit Hit Miss 5 On Target
4 Miss Miss. Miss | 6 On at
5 Hit Miss Miss на
6 Miss Miss Miss Notes: a) If Bombardier on 11-25th mission, add 1 to die roll.
7 Hit Hit Miss b) If B-17 hit by flak over target, subtract 1 from die roll.
8 Miss Miss Miss c) If Bombardier KIA or seriously wounded, Bomb Run automatically Off
8 Hit Miss Miss Target. >
10 Miss Miss Miss d) After determining whether the bombs were On or Off Target, go to
11 Hit Miss Miss Table 0-7.
12 Hit Hit Hit
Note: For each hit, roll once on Table 0-4 Effect of Flak Hits.
0-4 EFFECT OF FLAK HITS
Roll 2D for each hit from Table 0-3.
ROLL NUMBER OF SHELL HITS
2 Burst Inside Plane (a)
3 1 (b)
4 %
5 3
6 2 0-7 BOMBING ACCURACY
7 1 Roll 2D to determine the percentage of bombs hitting within 1000 feet of
АЁ E aiming point.
9 3
n Y © ON TARGET OFF TARGET
12 % ROLL PERCENTAGE ROLL PERCENTAGE
Notes: a) Roll once on Table'0-5 to determine the section of the plane 2 75 2 10
affected by the burst, and see Rules section 19.0 for effects of BIP. 3 60 3 5
b) For each shell hit, roll once on Table 0-5 to determine the section of % 30 4 E
the B-17 damaged. 5 20 5 0
6 30 6 0
7 40 7 0
8 30 8 2
20 9 0
10 30 10 0
11 50 11 5
12 88-20 12 10
8510006

## Page 36

B-17: ERRATA AND CLARIFICATIONS
1, Table BL-3 should read ‘‘Roll 1D per attempt to extinguish fire.""
2. Although thereare six fire extinguisher counters provided, only five should be in play.
3. Table M-2, under Note (a), **FE 190" should read **FW 190"'. Alsoa dd:
2ormore FCA = FBOA
2ormore FBOA =Destroyed
FCA + FBOA - FBOA
. 4. Fighter attack die roll modifiers are cumulative for additional FCA and FBOA hits,
except that a roll of **6'' always hits. Remember that a fighter destroyed (even by an
accumulation of hits) does not get to attack.
5. Recovery from frostibsci otrreec t as shown in Note (b) to Table BL-5, not as shown in
Rules Section 11.0.
6. On Table G-3, both Brest and St. Nazaire should be marked with an asterisk for in-
ereased flak occurence.
7. In the Rules Section 18.0, Random Events, the Random Events Table is incorrectly
listed as *'G-11"', when it should be ''B-7'.
8. The notes to Table G-7 apply to Tables G-6 and G-8 as well.
9. If the Navigator is KIA or Seriously Wounded, Table P-1 Note (b) applies.
10. On Table B-5, 6 O'Clock High, Roll 11”, **Walking Hits/Fuselage" should be
Type (a).
M. In the rules on page 11, Section 6.4 should read **3-1 22-O n e Wave."
12. There are no landing dice roll modifiers for having 1 or 2 engines out.
13. The B-17 takes a hit on Table P-1 (Nose Compartment), /10, rolls a second die
“4-6” - Вот Run -3. If this damage was done by flak the Bomb Run roll is now -4 (-3 for
the damage, and -1 for being hit by flak during the Bomb Run).
14. If the “No Attackers” result is rolled on Table B-3, then the additional fighters which
attack the lead and tail position bombers do not appear.
15. Spray fire is directed at a specific clock position (6 O'Clock High), not at individual
attacking fighters. If more than one fighter attacks from this position (during a successive
attack) roll once on Table M-5 for each.
16. Ifa B-17takesa fuel tank hit which doesn't leave it enough fuel to bomb the target and
return, the B-17 may abort the mission and still count it towards the 25 mission campaign.
17. A B-17 is never required to spend more than 2 Turns/Zone.
18. Table BL-1, Roll ''10'', Case (g) should say ''4, 5, or 6 Turns" left, not Zones.
19. Ifa fuel tank which is already leaking is hit again, roll ford amage normally (either fire,
leak or self seal). The previous hit has no effect.
20. If an engine fire is put out by extinguishers, the engine is out and feathered.
21. If the Pilot Compartment Windshield is knocked out (Table P-2, #11), the heat is out
for this compartment (Pilot and Co-Pilot heat out).
22. Rouen is in Zone 4, not in Zone 5 as shown on Chart G-11, Flight Log Gazetteer.
23. A B-17 can be irreparably damaged only by a flak BIP or crash landing.
24. Crew members may voluntarily bail out over England (Table G-6) before attemptinga
dangerous landing.
25. Vegesack is a U-Boat type target with increased flak (+ 1 to die roll on Table O-2).
26, When a B-17 lands in England with no landing gear, an additional roll is made for
irreparable damage. If the plane does not crash, roll 1D: 1-3 = B-17 is reparable; 4-6 = B-17
irreparably damaged.
27. The Radio Operator must be in the Radio Room toc onsider the radio operational and
avoid the negative modifier for landing.
28. The altitude drop required by the loss of oxygen does not occur during the turn in
which the damage takes place. Begin the next turn at 10,000.
29. When a result of *'2"' is rolled on Table G-11 Random Events, roll for feathering the
affected engine according to Note (c) Table BL-1.
30. Any guns jammed by extreme cold (from a result of **10" rolled on Table G-11
Random Events) are automatically unjammed if the B-17 drops to 10,000 feet.
31. A B-17 which must make a mandatory crash landing its next turn must resolve fighter
attacks normally before landing.
32. When entering the Designated Target Zone roll for weather before determining
Fighter Cover (Table G-5) or attacking enemy fighters waves (Table B-2).
33. The Ace bonus does apply to Tail Guns passing shots (see 9.2). The leading gunner ace
of the 8th Air Force was a Tail Gunner proficient with this technique (12 credited kills).
34. On Table G-8, Bailout Over Water, Note (b) applies only if the B-17 is out of forma-
tion when bailout occurs.
35. On Chart G-11, Flight Log Gazetteer, Note (a) applies to Table B-2 also.
36. On Table O-5, Area Affected by Flak Hits, for the results 6", '8'', and **11"*, refer
to Table BL-1, Wings, not BL-4 as shown.
37. Add this note to Tables G-7 and G-8: *‘Slightly wounded crewmen, die roll -1””.

## Page 37

P-5 WAIST
Roll 2D per shell hit.
ROLL AREA HIT EFFECT
2 Oxygen Supply Roll 1D: 1,2 = Port Gunner; 3,4 = Starboard
Hit Gunner; 5 = Ball Gunner; 6 = Fire, Waist
0x out. Roll to extinguish fire on Table
4,5 e No effect.
‎ س
i
наNo effect.
9 Ball Turret Roll 10: 1,2 = roll wound for gunner on Table
B1-4; 3 = gunner's heat out( b); 4,5 = guns out;
6 = turret mechanism ам (с).
Suit Heaters Roll 1D: 1-3 = Port Gunner heat out; 4-6 =
Starboard Gunner heat out. (b)
Notes: a) See rules section Oxygen Out.
b) See rules section Heat Out/Frostbite.
c) Gunner is trapped in turret, may not fire guns, and may not bail out. If
landing gear is inoperable, gunner is automatically KIA on landing.
SS
P-6 TAIL SECTION
Roll 2D per shell hit.
ROLL AREA HIT EFFECT
2 Suit Heater Tail Gunner's heat out. (a)
A4 TTail ATurreAt TailS Aino per:P RT EM BIAX E m
MT No effect. ERN
11 den Supply Roll 1D: 1-5 = 1 oxygen supply hit; 6 = Fire,
and Tail oxygen out (d). Roll to extinguish fire
on Table B1-3.
Notes: a) See rules section Heat Out/Frostbite.
b) If both elevators are inoperable, landing rolls on Tables G-9 and G-10
are -1.
2I f tailplane root accumulates 3 hits during mission, tailplane rips off. If
ine is off, landing rolls on Tables G-9 and G-10 are -1; if both
les come off, bailout immediately on Table G-7.
d) See rules section Oxygen Out.

## Page 38

*[No text extracted]*

## Page 39

S „_
A portion (reduced in size here) of 11"x16" mounted ad
A large heavy bomber passes outward bound
from England over the French coast through the
thin, cold air at 24,000 feet. Inside, the ten men of Each mission begins by selecting the target city. The
the crew finger their guns, listen to the roar of the B-17 marker is then moved across the strategic map
engines, and scan the sky for the small black dots board, zone by zone, from England to the target and
which will bring battle. It is late fall 1942. The back. In each zone, however, there is the chance that
enemy fighters will appear. Die rolls determine the
plane is a B-17 Flying Fortress, known to those who
number, type, and position of the fighters. You must
fly her, defend her, and depend upon her, as the
allocate defensive machine gun fire, hoping to knock
Queen of the Skies.
down the fighters or spoil their aim. After the bomber
B-17: Queen of the Skies is The Avalon Hill Game fires, the fighter's get their chance. Charts are con-
sulted to determine if hits are made, where the
Company's new strategy game which re-creates the
bombing missions and aerial combat of the B-17 damage is, and how serious. The Queen is an in-
(model F) bombers of the U.S. Eighth Air Force over credibly tough plane and can take a lot of punish-
ment, but there is always the chance of that lucky hit
Europe between November 1942 and May 1943. This
that will bring her down. As the mission grinds on, you
was the critical initial period for the American heavy
start to sweat—wounded crewmen, low ammunition,
bombers, when the green crews had to quickly learn
their jobs and prove the feasibility of daylight burned out engines, oil leaks, and more enemy
fighters.
bombing.
B-17 is designed primarily as a solitaire game, pitting
you and your crew against the German air defenses. Playing Time: 15 minutes to 1 hour
(A second player may optionally control the enemy
fighters.) Your goal is to complete 25 missions and Complexity Rating (from 1 to 10, 10 the highest): 3
earn that ticket home.
Components:
11"x16" Game Board (mounted) Crew Placement Chart
88 Die Cut Markers Strategic Movement Board
Enemy Fighter Cards Rulebook
Mission Record Sheet Pad 2 Dice
©1983
The Avalon Hill
Game Company
Games OF
Messerschmidt Counter for use on gameboard STRATEGT Baltimore, MD: Printed in USA 45708"00851
8-17

